Project Gutenberg's Told in the Coffee House, by Cyrus Adler and Allan Ramsay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Told in the Coffee House
       Turkish Tales

Author: Cyrus Adler
        Allan Ramsay

Release Date: December 2, 2009 [EBook #30577]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOLD IN THE COFFEE HOUSE ***




Produced by Ritu Aggarwal and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                       TOLD IN THE COFFEE HOUSE




                       Told in the Coffee House

                             Turkish Tales


                    Collected and done into English
                                  by
                     CYRUS ADLER AND ALLAN RAMSAY


                               New York
                         The Macmillan Company
                     London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.
                                 1898

                         _All rights reserved_


                           COPYRIGHT, 1898,
                       By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.


                             Norwood Press
                 J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith
                         Norwood Mass. U.S.A.




                               PREFACE


In the course of a number of visits to Constantinople, I became much
interested in the tales that are told in the coffee houses. These are
usually little more than rooms, with walls made of small panes of
glass. The furniture consists of a tripod with a contrivance for
holding the kettle, and a fire to keep the coffee boiling. A carpeted
bench traverses the entire length of the room. This is occupied by
turbaned Turks, their legs folded under them, smoking nargilehs or
chibooks or cigarettes, and sipping coffee. A few will be engaged in a
game of backgammon, but the majority enter into conversation, at first
only in syllables, which gradually gives rise to a general discussion.
Finally, some sage of the neighborhood comes in, and the company
appeals to him to settle the point at issue. This he usually does by
telling a story to illustrate his opinion. Some of the stories told on
these occasions are adaptations of those already known in Arabic and
Persian literature, but the Turkish mind gives them a new setting and
a peculiar philosophy. They are characteristic of the habits, customs,
and methods of thought of the people, and for this reason seem worthy
of preservation.

Two of these tales have been taken from the Armenian, and were
received from Dr. K. Ohannassian of Constantinople. For one, _The
Merciful Khan_, I am indebted to Mr. George Kennan. None of them has
been translated from any book or manuscript, and all are, as nearly as
practicable, in the form in which they are usually narrated. Most of
the stories have been collected by Mr. Allan Ramsay, who, by a long
residence in Constantinople, has had special opportunities for
learning to know the modern Turk. It is due to him, however, to say
that for the style and editing he is in no wise responsible, and that
all sins of omission and commission must be laid at my door.

                                                     CYRUS ADLER.
  COSMOS CLUB, WASHINGTON,
     February 1, 1898.




                               CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE
  HOW THE HODJA SAVED ALLAH                                        1
  BETTER IS THE FOLLY OF WOMAN THAN THE WISDOM OF MAN             13
  THE HANOUM AND THE UNJUST CADI                                  23
  WHAT HAPPENED TO HADJI, A MERCHANT OF THE BEZESTAN              29
  HOW THE JUNKMAN TRAVELLED TO FIND TREASURE IN HIS OWN YARD      35
  HOW CHAPKIN HALID BECAME CHIEF DETECTIVE                        43
  HOW COBBLER AHMET BECAME THE CHIEF ASTROLOGER                   52
  THE WISE SON OF ALI PASHA                                       65
  THE MERCIFUL KHAN                                               73
  KING KARA-KUSH OF BITHYNIA                                      77
  THE PRAYER RUG AND THE DISHONEST STEWARD                        80
  THE GOOSE, THE EYE, THE DAUGHTER, AND THE ARM                   84
  THE FORTY WISE MEN                                              89
  HOW THE PRIEST KNEW THAT IT WOULD SNOW                         103
  WHO WAS THE THIRTEENTH SON?                                    107
  PARADISE SOLD BY THE YARD                                      120
  JEW TURNED TURK                                                126
  THE METAMORPHOSIS                                              130
  THE CALIF OMAR                                                 138
  KALAIDJI AVRAM OF BALATA                                       140
  HOW MEHMET ALI PASHA OF EGYPT ADMINISTERED JUSTICE             144
  HOW THE FARMER LEARNED TO CURE HIS WIFE--A TURKISH Ã†SOP        148
  THE LANGUAGE OF BIRDS                                          153
  THE SWALLOW'S ADVICE                                           156
  WE KNOW NOT WHAT THE DAWN MAY BRING FORTH                      158
  OLD MEN MADE YOUNG                                             161
  THE BRIBE                                                      165
  HOW THE DEVIL LOST HIS WAGER                                   169
  THE EFFECTS OF RAKI                                            172




HOW THE HODJA SAVED ALLAH


Not far from the famous Mosque Bayezid an old Hodja kept a school, and
very skilfully he taught the rising generation the everlasting lesson
from the Book of Books. Such knowledge had he of human nature that by
a glance at his pupil he could at once tell how long it would take him
to learn a quarter of the Koran. He was known over the whole Empire as
the best reciter and imparter of the Sacred Writings of the Prophet.
For many years this Hodja, famed far and wide as the Hodja of Hodjas,
had taught in this little school. The number of times he had recited
the Book with his pupils is beyond counting; and should we attempt to
consider how often he must have corrected them for some misplaced
word, our beards would grow gray in the endeavor.

Swaying to and fro one day as fast as his old age would let him, and
reciting to his pupils the latter part of one of the chapters, Bakara,
divine inspiration opened his inward eye and led him to pause at the
following sentence: "And he that spends his money in the ways of Allah
is likened unto a grain of wheat that brings forth seven sheaves, and
in each sheaf an hundred grains; and Allah giveth twofold unto whom He
pleaseth." As his pupils, one after the other, recited this verse to
him, he wondered why he had overlooked its meaning for so many years.
Fully convinced that anything either given to Allah, or in the way
that He proposes, was an investment that brought a percentage
undreamed of in known commerce, he dismissed his pupils, and putting
his hand into his bosom drew forth from the many folds of his dress a
bag, and proceeded to count his worldly possessions.

Carefully and attentively he counted and then recounted his money, and
found that if invested in the ways of Allah it would bring a return of
no less than one thousand piasters.

"Think of it," said the Hodja to himself, "one thousand piasters! One
thousand piasters! Mashallah! a fortune."

So, having dismissed his school, he sallied forth, his bag of money in
his hand, and began distributing its contents to the needy that he met
in the highways. Ere many hours had passed the whole of his savings
was gone. The Hodja was very happy; for now he was the creditor in
Allah's books for one thousand piasters.

He returned to his house and ate his evening meal of bread and olives,
and was content.

The next day came. The thousand piasters had not yet arrived. He ate
his bread, he imagined he had olives, and was content.

The third day came. The old Hodja had no bread and he had no olives.
He suffered the pangs of hunger. So when the end of the day had come,
and his pupils had departed to their homes, the Hodja, with a full
heart and an empty stomach, walked out of the town, and soon got
beyond the city walls.

There, where no one could hear him, he lamented his sad fate, and the
great calamity that had befallen him in his old age.

What sin had he committed? What great wrong had his ancestors done,
that the wrath of the Almighty had thus fallen on him, when his
earthly course was well-nigh run?

"Ya! Allah! Allah!" he cried, and beat his breast.

As if in answer to his cry, the howl of the dreaded Fakir Dervish came
over across the plain. In those days the Fakir Dervish was a terror in
the land. He knocked at the door, and it was opened. He asked, and
received food. If refused, life often paid the penalty.

The Hodja's lamentations were now greater than ever; for should the
Dervish ask him for food and the Hodja have nothing to give, he would
certainly be killed.

"Allah! Allah! Allah! Guide me now. Protect one of your faithful
followers," cried the frightened Hodja, and he looked around to see if
there was any one to rescue him from his perilous position. But not a
soul was to be seen, and the walls of the city were five miles
distant. Just then the howl of the Dervish again reached his ear, and
in terror he flew, he knew not whither. As luck would have it he came
upon a tree, up which, although stiff from age and weak from want, the
Hodja, with wonderful agility, scrambled and, trembling like a leaf,
awaited his fate.

Nearer and nearer came the howling Dervish, till at last his long hair
could be seen floating in the air, as with rapid strides he preceded
the wind upon his endless journey.

On and on he came, his wild yell sending the blood, from very fear, to
unknown parts of the poor Hodja's body and leaving his face as yellow
as a melon.

To his utter dismay, the Hodja saw the Dervish approach the tree and
sit down under its shade.

Sighing deeply, the Dervish said in a loud voice, "Why have I come
into this world? Why were my forefathers born? Why was anybody born?
Oh, Allah! Oh, Allah! What have you done! Misery! Misery! Nothing but
misery to mankind and everything living. Shall I not be avenged for
all the misery my father and my father's fathers have suffered? I
shall be avenged."

Striking his chest a loud blow, as if to emphasize the decision he had
come to, the Dervish took a small bag that lay by his side, and slowly
proceeded to untie the leather strings that bound it. Bringing forth
from it a small image, he gazed at it a moment and then addressed it
in the following terms:

"You, Job! you bore much; you have written a book in which your
history is recorded; you have earned the reputation of being the most
patient man that ever lived; yet I have read your history and found
that when real affliction oppressed you, you cursed God. You have made
men believe, too, that there is a reward in this life for all the
afflictions they suffer. You have misled mankind. For these sins no
one has ever punished you. Now I will punish you," and taking his
long, curved sword in his hand he cut off the head of the figure.

The Dervish bent forward, took another image and, gazing upon it with
a contemptuous smile, thus addressed it:

"David, David, singer of songs of peace in this world and in the world
to come, I have read your sayings in which you counsel men to lead a
righteous life for the sake of the reward which they are to receive. I
have learned that you have misled your fellow-mortals with your songs
of peace and joy. I have read your history, and I find that you have
committed many sins. For these sins and for misleading your fellowmen
you have never been punished. Now I will punish you," and taking his
sword in his hand he cut off David's head.

Again the Dervish bent forward and brought forth an image which he
addressed as follows:

"You, Solomon, are reputed to have been the wisest man that ever
lived. You had command over the host of the Genii and could control
the legion of the demons. They came at the bidding of your signet
ring, and they trembled at the mysterious names to which you gave
utterance. You understood every living thing. The speech of the beasts
of the field, of the birds of the air, of the insects of the earth,
and of the fishes of the sea, was known unto you. Yet when I read your
history I found that in spite of the vast knowledge that was
vouchsafed unto you, you committed many wrongs and did many foolish
things, which in the end brought misery into the world and destruction
unto your people; and for all these no one has ever punished you. Now
I will punish you," and taking his sword he cut off Solomon's head.

Again the Dervish bent forward and brought forth from the bag another
figure, which he addressed thus:

"Jesus, Jesus, prophet of God, you came into this world to atone, by
giving your blood, for the sins of mankind and to bring unto them a
religion of peace. You founded a church, whose history I have studied,
and I see that it set fathers against their children and brethren
against one another; that it brought strife into the world; that the
lives of men and women and children were sacrificed so that the rivers
ran red with blood unto the seas. Truly you were a great prophet, but
the misery you caused must be avenged. For it no one has yet punished
you. Now I will punish you," and he took his sword and cut off Jesus'
head.

With a sorrowful face the Dervish bent forward and brought forth
another image from the bag.

"Mohammed," he said, "I have slain Job, David, Solomon, and Jesus.
What shall I do with you? After the followers of Jesus had shed much
blood, their religion spread over the world, was acceptable unto man,
and the nations were at peace. Then you came into the world, and you
brought a new religion, and father rose against father, and brother
rose against brother; hatred was sown between your followers and the
followers of Jesus, and again the rivers ran red with blood unto the
seas; and you have not been punished. For this I will punish you. By
the beard of my forefathers, whose blood was made to flow in your
cause, you too must die," and with a blow the head of Mohammed fell to
the ground.

Then the Dervish prostrated himself to the earth, and after a silent
prayer rose and brought forth from the bag the last figure. Reverently
he bowed to it, and then he addressed it as follows:

"Oh, Allah! The Allah of Allahs. There is but one Allah, and thou art
He. I have slain Job, David, Solomon, Jesus, and Mohammed for the
folly that they have brought into the world. Thou, God, art all
powerful. All men are thy children, thou createst them and bringest
them into the world. The thoughts that they think are thy thoughts. If
all these men have brought all this evil into the world, it is thy
fault. Shall I punish them and allow thee to go unhurt? No. I must
punish thee also," and he raised his sword to strike.

As the sword circled in the air the Hodja, secreted in the tree,
forgot the fear in which he stood of the Dervish. In the excitement of
the moment he cried out in a loud tone of voice: "Stop! Stop! He owes
me one thousand piasters."

The Dervish reeled and fell senseless to the ground. The Hodja was
overcome at his own words and trembled with fear, convinced that his
last hour had arrived. The Dervish lay stretched upon his back on the
grass like one dead. At last the Hodja took courage. Breaking a twig
from off the tree, he threw it down upon the Dervish's face, but the
Dervish made no sign. The Hodja took more courage, removed one of his
heavy outer shoes and threw it on the outstretched figure of the
Dervish, but still the Dervish lay motionless. The Hodja carefully
climbed down the tree, gave the body of the Dervish a kick, and
climbed back again, and still the Dervish did not stir. At length the
Hodja descended from the tree and placed his ear to the Dervish's
heart. It did not beat. The Dervish was dead.

"Ah, well," said the Hodja, "at least I shall not starve. I will take
his garments and sell them and buy me some bread."

The Hodja commenced to remove the Dervish's garments. As he took off
his belt he found that it was heavy. He opened it, and saw that it
contained gold. He counted the gold and found that it was exactly one
thousand piasters.

The Hodja turned his face toward Mecca and raising his eyes to heaven
said, "Oh God, you have kept your promise, but," he added, "not before
I saved your life."




BETTER IS THE FOLLY OF WOMAN THAN THE WISDOM OF MAN


There lived in Constantinople an old Hodja, a learned man, who had a
son. The boy followed in his father's footsteps, went every day to the
Mosque Aya Sofia, seated himself in a secluded spot, to the left of
the pillar bearing the impress of the Conqueror's hand, and engaged in
the study of the Koran. Daily he might be seen seated, swaying his
body to and fro, and reciting to himself the verses of the Holy Book.

The dearest wish of a Mohammedan theological student is to be able to
recite the entire Koran by heart. Many years are spent in memorizing
the Holy Book, which must be recited with a prescribed cantillation,
and in acquiring a rhythmical movement of the body which accompanies
the chant.

When Abdul, for that was the young man's name, had reached his
nineteenth year, he had, by the most assiduous study, finally
succeeded in mastering three-fourths of the Koran. At this achievement
his pride rose, his ambition was fired, and he determined to become a
great man.

The day that he reached this decision he did not go to the Mosque, but
stopped at home, in his father's house, and sat staring at the fire
burning in the grate. Several times the father asked:

"My son, what do you see in the fire?"

And each time the son answered:

"Nothing, father."

He was very young; he could not see.

Finally, the young man picked up courage and gave expression to his
thoughts.

"Father," he said, "I wish to become a great man."

"That is very easy," said the father.

"And to be a great man," continued the son, "I must first go to
Mecca." For no Mohammedan priest or theologian, or even layman, has
fulfilled all of the cardinal precepts of his faith unless he has made
the pilgrimage to the Holy City.

To his son's last observation the father blandly replied: "It is very
easy to go to Mecca."

"How, easy?" asked the son. "On the contrary, it is very difficult;
for the journey is costly, and I have no money."

"Listen, my son," said the father. "You must become a scribe, the
writer of the thoughts of your brethren, and your fortune is made."

"But I have not even the implements necessary for a scribe," said the
son.

"All that can be easily arranged," said the father; "your grandfather
had an ink-horn; I will give it you; I will buy you some
writing-paper, and we will get you a box to sit in; all that you need
to do is to sit still, look wise and your fortune is made."

And indeed the advice was good. For letter-writing is an art which
only the few possess. The ability to write by no means carries with it
the ability to compose. Epistolary genius is rare.

Abdul was much rejoiced at the counsel that had been given him, and
lost no time in carrying out the plan. He took his grandfather's
ink-horn, the paper his father bought, got himself a box and began his
career as a scribe.

Abdul was a child, he knew nothing, but deeming himself wise he sought
to surpass the counsel of his father.

"To look wise," he said, "is not sufficient; I must have some other
attraction."

And after much thought he hit upon the following idea. Over his box he
painted a legend: "The wisdom of man is greater than the wisdom of
woman." People thought the sign very clever, customers came, the young
Hodja took in many piasters and he was correspondingly happy.

This sign one day attracted the eyes and mind of a Hanoum (Turkish
lady). Seeing that Abdul was a manly youth, she went to him and said:

"Hodja, I have a difficult letter to write. I have heard that thou art
very wise, so I have come to thee. To write the letter thou wilt need
all thy wit. Moreover, the letter is a long one, and I cannot stand
here while it is being written. Come to my Konak (house) at three this
afternoon, and we will write the letter."

The Hodja was overcome with admiration for his fair client, and
surprised at the invitation. He was enchanted, his heart beat wildly,
and so great was his agitation that his reply of acquiescence was
scarcely audible.

The invitation had more than the charm of novelty to make it
attractive. He had never talked with a woman outside of his own family
circle. To be admitted to a lady's house was in itself an adventure.

Long before the appointed time, the young Hodja--impetuous
youth--gathered together his reeds, ink, and sand. With feverish step
he wended his way to the house. Lattices covered the windows, a high
wall surrounded the garden, and a ponderous gate barred the entrance.
Thrice he raised the massive knocker.

"Who is there?" called a voice from within.

"The scribe," was the reply.

"It is well," said the porter; the gate was unbarred, and the Hodja
permitted to enter. Directly he was ushered into the apartment of his
fair client.

The lady welcomed him cordially.

"Ah! Hodja Effendi, I am glad to see you; pray sit down."

The Hodja nervously pulled out his writing-implements.

"Do not be in such a hurry," said the lady. "Refresh yourself; take a
cup of coffee, smoke a cigarette, and we will write the letter
afterwards."

So he lit a cigarette, drank a cup of coffee, and they fell to
talking. Time flew; the minutes seemed like seconds, and the hours
were as minutes. While they were thus enjoying themselves there
suddenly came a heavy knock at the gate.

"It is my husband, the Pasha," cried the lady. "What shall I do? If he
finds you here, he will kill you! I am so frightened."

The Hodja was frightened too. Again there came a knock at the gate.

"I have it," and taking Abdul by the arm, she said, "you must get into
the box," indicating a large chest in the room. "Quick, quick, if you
prize your life utter not a word, and Inshallah I will save you."

Abdul now, too late, saw his folly. It was his want of experience; but
driven by the sense of danger, he entered the chest; the lady locked
it and took the key.

A moment afterwards the Pasha came in.

"I am very tired," he said; "bring me coffee and a chibook."

"Good evening, Pasha Effendi," said the lady. "Sit down. I have
something to tell you."

"Bah!" said the Pasha; "I want none of your woman's talk; 'the hair of
woman is long, and her wits are short,' says the proverb. Bring me my
pipe."

"But, Pasha Effendi," said the lady, "I have had an adventure to-day."

"Bah!" said the Pasha; "what adventure can a woman have--forgot to
paint your eyebrows or color your nails, I suppose."

"No, Pasha Effendi. Be patient, and I will tell you. I went out to-day
to write a letter."

"A letter?" said the Pasha; "to whom would you write a letter?"

"Be patient," she said, "and I will tell you my story. So I came to
the box of a young scribe with beautiful eyes."

"A young man with beautiful eyes," shouted the Pasha. "Where is he?
I'll kill him!" and he drew his sword.

The Hodja in the chest heard every word and trembled in every limb.

"Be patient, Pasha Effendi; I said I had an adventure, and you did not
believe me. I told the young man that the letter was long, and I
could not stand in the street to write it. So I asked him to come and
see me this afternoon."

"Here? to this house?" thundered the Pasha.

"Yes, Pasha Effendi," said the lady. "So the Hodja came here, and I
gave him coffee and a cigarette, and we talked, and the minutes seemed
like seconds, and the hours were as minutes. All at once came your
knock at the gate, and I said to the Hodja, 'That is the Pasha; and if
he finds you here, he will kill you.'"

"And I will kill him," screamed the Pasha, "where is he?"

"Be patient, Pasha Effendi," said the lady, "and I will tell you. When
you knocked a second time, I suddenly thought of the chest, and I put
the Hodja in."

"Let me at him!" screamed the Pasha. "I'll cut off his head!"

"O Pasha," she said, "what a hurry you are in to slay this comely
youth. He is your prey; he cannot escape you. The youth is not only in
the box, but it is locked, and the key is in my pocket. Here it is."

The lady walked over to the Pasha, stretched out her hand and gave him
the key.

As he took it, she said:

"Philopena!"

"Bah!" said the Pasha, in disgust. He threw the key on the floor and
left the harem, slamming the door behind him.

After he had gone, the lady took up the key, unlocked the door, and
let out the trembling Hodja.

"Go now, Hodja, to your box," she said. "Take down your sign and write
instead: 'The wit of woman is twofold the wit of man,' for I am a
woman, and in one day I have fooled two men."




THE HANOUM AND THE UNJUST CADI


It was, and still is, in some parts of Constantinople, the custom of
the refuse-gatherer to go about the streets with a basket on his back,
and a wooden shovel in his hand, calling out 'refuse removed.'

A certain Chepdji, plying his trade, had, in the course of five years
of assiduous labor, amassed, to him, the no unimportant sum of five
hundred piasters. He was afraid to keep this money by him; so hearing
the Cadi of Stamboul highly and reverently spoken of, he decided to
entrust his hard-earned savings to the Cadi's keeping.

Going to the Cadi, he said: "Oh learned and righteous man, for five
long years have I labored, carrying the dregs and dross of rich and
poor alike, and I have saved a sum of five hundred piasters. With the
help of Allah, in another two years I shall have saved a further sum
of at least one hundred piasters, when, Inshallah, I shall return to
my country and clasp my wife and children again. In the meantime you
will be granting a boon to your slave, if you will consent to keep
this money for me until the time for departure has come."

The Cadi replied: "Thou hast done well, my son; the money will be kept
and given to thee when required."

The poor Chepdji, well satisfied, departed. But after a very short
time he learned that several of his friends were about to return to
their Memleket (province), and he decided to join them, thinking that
his five hundred piasters were ample for the time being, 'Besides,'
said he, 'who knows what may or may not happen in the next two years?'
So he decided to depart with his friends at once.

He went to the Cadi, explained that he had changed his mind, that he
was going to leave for his country immediately, and asked for his
money. The Cadi called him a dog and ordered him to be whipped out of
the place by his servants. Alas! what could the poor Chepdji do! He
wept in impotent despair, as he counted the number of years he must
yet work before beholding his loved ones.

One day, while moving the dirt from the Konak of a wealthy Pasha, his
soul uttered a sigh which reached the ears of the Hanoum, and from the
window she asked him why he sighed so deeply. He replied that he
sighed for something that could in no way interest her. The Hanoum's
sympathy was excited, and after much persuasion, he finally, with
tears in his eyes, related to her his great misfortune. The Hanoum
thought for a few minutes and then told him to go the following day to
the Cadi at a certain hour and again ask for the money as if nothing
had happened.

The Hanoum in the meantime gathered together a quantity of jewelry, to
the value of several hundred pounds, and instructed her favorite and
confidential slave to come with her to the Cadi and remain outside
whilst she went in, directing her that when she saw the Chepdji come
out and learned that he had gotten his money, to come in the Cadi's
room hurriedly and say to her, "your husband has arrived from Egypt,
and is waiting for you at the Konak."

The Hanoum then went to the Cadi, carrying in her hand a bag
containing the jewelry. With a profound salaam she said:

"Oh Cadi, my husband, who is in Egypt and who has been there for
several years, has at last asked me to come and join him there; these
jewels are of great value, and I hesitate to take them with me on so
long and dangerous a journey. If you would kindly consent to keep them
for me until my return, or if I never return to keep them as a token
of my esteem, I will think of you with lifelong gratitude."

The Hanoum then began displaying the rich jewelry. Just then the
Chepdji entered, and bending low, said:

"Oh master, your slave has come for his savings in order to proceed to
his country."

"Ah, welcome," said the Cadi, "so you are going already!" and
immediately ordered the treasurer to pay the five hundred piasters to
the Chepdji.

"You see," said the Cadi to the Hanoum, "what confidence the people
have in me. This money I have held for some time without receipt or
acknowledgment; but directly it is asked for it is paid."

No sooner had the Chepdji gone out of the door, than the Hanoum's
slave came rushing in, crying: "Hanoum Effendi! Hanoum Effendi! Your
husband has arrived from Egypt, and is anxiously awaiting you at the
Konak."

The Hanoum, in well-feigned excitement, gathered up her jewelry and,
wishing the Cadi a thousand years of happiness, departed.

The Cadi was thunderstruck, and caressing his beard with grave
affection thoughtfully said: "Allah! Allah! For forty years have I
been judge, but never was a cause pleaded in this fashion before."




WHAT HAPPENED TO HADJI, A MERCHANT OF THE BEZESTAN


Hadji was a married man, but even Turkish married men are not
invulnerable to the charms of other women. It happened one day, when
possibly the engrossing power of his lawful wife's influence was
feeble upon him, that a charming Hanoum came to his shop to purchase
some spices. After the departure of his fair visitor Hadji, do what he
might, could not drive from his mind's eye, either her image, or her
attractive power. He was further greatly puzzled by a tiny black bag
containing twelve grains of wheat, which the Hanoum had evidently
forgotten.

Till a late hour that night did Hadji remain in his shop, in the hope
that either the Hanoum or one of her servants would come for the bag,
and thus give him the means of seeing her again or at least of
learning where she lived. But Hadji was doomed to disappointment, and,
much preoccupied, he returned to his home. There he sat, unresponsive
to his wife's conversation, thinking, and no doubt making mental
comparisons between her and his visitor.

Hadji remained downcast day after day, and at last, giving way to his
wife's entreaties to share his troubles, he frankly told her what had
happened, and that ever since that day his soul was in his visitor's
bondage.

"Oh husband," replied his wife, "and do you not understand what that
black bag containing the twelve grains of wheat means?"

"Alas! no," replied Hadji.

"Why, my husband, it is plain, plain as if it had been told. She lives
in the Wheat Market, at house No. 12, with a black door."

Much excited, Hadji rushed off and found that there was a No. 12 in
the Wheat Market, with a black door, so he promptly knocked. The door
opened, and who should he behold but the lady in question? She,
however, instead of speaking to him, threw a basin of water out into
the street and then shut the door. Hadji, with mingled feelings of
gratitude to his wife for having so accurately directed him, but none
the less surprised at his reception, lingered about the doorway for a
time and then returned home. He greeted his wife more pleasantly than
he had for many days, and told her of his strange reception.

"Why," said his wife, "don't you understand what the basin of water
thrown out of the door means?"

"Alas! no," said Hadji.

"Veyh! Veyh! (an exclamation of pity) it means that at the back of the
house there is a running stream, and that you must go to her that
way."

Off rushed Hadji and found that his wife was right; there was a
running stream at the back of the house, so he knocked at the back
door. The Hanoum, however, instead of opening it, came to the window,
showed a mirror, reversed it and then disappeared. Hadji lingered at
the back of the house for a long time, but seeing no further sign of
life, he returned to his home much dejected. On entering the house,
his wife greeted him with: "Well, was it not as I told you?"

"Yes," said Hadji. "You are truly a wonderful woman, Mashallah! But I
do not know why she came to the window and showed me a mirror both in
front and back, instead of opening the door."

"Oh," said his wife, "that is very simple; she means that you must go
when the face of the moon has reversed itself, about ten o'clock." The
hour arrived, Hadji hurried off, and so did his wife; the one to see
his love, and the other to inform the police.

Whilst Hadji and his charmer were talking in the garden the police
seized them and carried them both off to prison, and Hadji's wife,
having accomplished her mission, returned home.

The next morning she baked a quantity of lokum cakes, and taking them
to the prison, begged entrance of the guards and permission to
distribute these cakes to the prisoners, for the repose of the souls
of her dead. This being a request which could not be denied, she was
allowed to enter. Finding the cell in which the lady who had
infatuated her husband was confined, she offered to save her the
disgrace of the exposure, provided she would consent never again to
look upon Hadji, the merchant, with envious or loving eyes. The
conditions were gratefully accepted, and Hadji's wife changed places
with the prisoner.

When they were brought before the judge, Hadji was thunderstruck to
see his wife, but being a wise man he held his peace, and left her to
do the talking, which she did most vigorously, vehemently protesting
against the insult inflicted on both her and her husband in bringing
them to prison, because they chose to converse in a garden, being
lawfully wedded people; in witness whereof, she called upon the
Bekdji (watchman) and the Imam (priest) of the district and several of
her neighbors.

Poor Hadji was dumfounded, and, accompanied by his better half, left
the prison, where he had expected to stay at least a year or two,
saying: "Truly thou art a wonderful woman, Mashallah."




HOW THE JUNKMAN TRAVELLED TO FIND TREASURE IN HIS OWN YARD


In one of the towers overlooking the Sea of Marmora and skirting the
ancient city of Stamboul, there lived an old junkman, who earned a
precarious livelihood in gathering cinders and useless pieces of iron,
and selling them to smiths.

Often did he moralize on the sad Kismet that had reduced him to the
task of daily laboring for his bread to make a shoe, perhaps for an
ass. Surely he, a true Mussulman, might at least be permitted to ride
the ass. His eternal longing often found satisfaction in passing his
hours of sleep in dreams of wealth and luxury. But with the dawning of
the day came reality and increased longing.

Often did he call on the spirit of sleep to reverse matters, but in
vain; with the rising of the sun began the gathering of the cinders
and iron.

One night he dreamt that he begged this nocturnal visitor to change
his night to day, and the spirit said to him: "Go to Egypt, and it
shall be so."

This encouraging phrase haunted him by day and inspired him by night.
So persecuted was he with the thought that when his wife said to him,
from the door, "Have you brought home any bread?" he would reply, "No,
I have not gone; I will go to-morrow;" thinking she had asked him,
"Have you gone to Egypt?"

At last, when friends and neighbors began to pity poor Ahmet, for that
was his name, as a man on whom the hand of Allah was heavily laid,
removing his intelligence, he one morning left his house, saying: "I
go! I go! to the land of wealth!" And he left his wife wringing her
hands in despair, while the neighbors tried to comfort her. Poor Ahmet
went straight on board a boat which he had been told was bound for
Iskender (Alexandria), and assured the captain that he was summoned
thither, and that he was bound to take him. Half-witted and mad
persons being more holy than others, Ahmet was conveyed to Iskender.

Arriving in Iskender, Hadji Ahmet roamed far and wide, proceeding as
far as Cairo, in search of the luxuries he had enjoyed at
Constantinople when in the land of Morpheus, which he had been
promised to enjoy in the sunshine, if he came to Egypt. Alas! for
Hadji Ahmet; the only bread he had to eat was that which was given him
by sympathizing humanity. Time sped on, sympathy was growing tired of
expending itself on Hadji Ahmet, and his crusts of bread were few and
far between.

Wearied of life and suffering, he decided to ask Allah to let him die,
and wandering out to the Pyramids he solicited the stones to have pity
and fall on him. It happened that a Turk heard this prayer, and said
to him:

"Why so miserable, father? Has your soul been so strangled that you
prefer its being dashed out of your body, to its remaining the
prescribed time in bondage?"

"Yes, my son," said Hadji Ahmet. "Far away in Stamboul, with the help
of God, I managed as a junkman to feed my wife and myself; but here am
I, in Egypt, a stranger, alone and starving, with possibly my wife
already dead of starvation, and all this through a dream."

"Alas! Alas! my father! that you at your age should be tempted to
wander so far from home and friends, because of a dream. Why, were I
to obey my dreams, I would at this present moment be in Stamboul,
digging for a treasure that lies buried under a tree. I can even now,
although I have never been there, describe where it is. In my mind's
eye I see a wall, a great wall, that must have been built many years
ago, and supporting or seeming to support this wall are towers with
many corners, towers that are round, towers that are square, and
others that have smaller towers within them. In one of these towers, a
square one, there live an old man and woman, and close by the tower is
a large tree, and every night when I dream of the place, the old man
tells me to dig and disclose the treasure. But, father, I am not such
a fool as to go to Stamboul and seek to verify this. It is an
oft-repeated dream and nothing more. See what you have been reduced to
by coming so far."

"Yes," said Hadji Ahmet, "it is a dream and nothing more, but you have
interpreted it. Allah be praised, you have encouraged me; I will
return to my home."

And Hadji Ahmet and the young stranger parted, the one grateful that
it had pleased Allah to give him the power to revive and encourage a
drooping spirit, and the other grateful to Allah that when he had
despaired of life a stranger should come and give him the
interpretation of his dream. He certainly had wandered far and long to
learn that the treasure was in his own garden.

Hadji Ahmet in due course, much to the astonishment of both wife and
neighbors, again appeared upon the scene not a much changed man. In
fact, he was the cinder and iron gatherer of old.

To all questions as to where he was and what he had been doing, he
would answer: "A dream sent me away, and a dream brought me back."

And the neighbors would say: "Truly he must be blessed."

One night Hadji Ahmet went to the tree, provided with spade and pick,
that he had secured from an obliging neighbor. After digging a short
time a heavy case was brought to view, in which he found gold, silver,
and precious jewels of great value. Hadji Ahmet replaced the case and
earth and returned to bed, much lamenting that it had pleased God to
furnish women, more especially his wife, with a long tongue, long
hair, and very short wits. Alas! he thought, if I tell my wife, I may
be hung as a robber, for it is against the laws of nature for a woman
to keep a secret. Yet, becoming more generous when thinking of the
years of toil and hardship she had shared with him, he decided to try
and see if, by chance, his wife was not an exception to other women.
Who knows, she might keep the secret. To test her, at no risk to
himself and the treasure, he conceived a plan.

Crawling from his bed, he sallied forth and bought, found, or stole an
egg. This egg on the following morning he showed to his wife, and said
to her:

"Alas! I fear I am not as other men, for evidently in the night I laid
this egg; and, wife mine, if the neighbors hear of this, your husband,
the long-suffering Hadji Ahmet, will be bastinadoed, bowstrung, and
burned to death. Ah, truly, my soul is strangled."

And without another word Hadji Ahmet, with a sack on his shoulder,
went forth to gather the cast-off shoes of horse, ox, or ass,
wondering if his wife would prove an exception in this, as she had in
many other ways, to other women.

In the evening he returned, heavily laden with his finds, and as he
neared home he heard rumors, ominous rumors, that a certain Hadji
Ahmet, who had been considered a holy man, had done something that was
unknown in the history of man, even in the history of hens--that he
had laid a dozen eggs.

Needless to add that Hadji Ahmet did not tell his wife of the
treasure, but daily went forth with his sack to gather iron and
cinders, and invariably found, when separating his finds of the day,
in company with his wife, at first one, and then more gold and silver
pieces, and now and then a precious stone.




HOW CHAPKIN HALID BECAME CHIEF DETECTIVE


In Balata there lived, some years ago, two scapegraces, called Chapkin
Halid and Pitch Osman. These two young rascals lived by their wits and
at the expense of their neighbors. But they often had to lament the
ever-increasing difficulties they encountered in procuring the few
piasters they needed daily for bread and the tavern. They had tried
several schemes in their own neighborhood, with exceptionally poor
results, and were almost disheartened when Chapkin Halid conceived an
idea that seemed to offer every chance of success. He explained to his
chum Osman that Balata was "played out," at least for a time, and that
they must go elsewhere to satisfy their needs. Halid's plan was to go
to Stamboul, and feign death in the principal street, while Osman was
to collect the funeral expenses of his friend Halid.

Arriving in Stamboul, Halid stretched himself on his back on the
pavement and covered his face with an old sack, while Osman sat
himself down beside the supposed corpse, and every now and then
bewailed the hard fate of the stranger who had met with death on the
first day of his arrival. The corpse prompted Osman whenever the coast
was clear, and the touching tale told by Osman soon brought
contributions for the burial of the stranger. Osman had collected
about thirty piasters, and Halid was seriously thinking of a
resurrection, but was prevented by the passing of the Grand Vizier,
who, upon inquiring why the man lay on the ground in that fashion, was
told that he was a stranger who had died in the street. The Grand
Vizier thereupon gave instructions to an Imam, who happened to be at
hand, to bury the stranger and come for the money to the Sublime
Porte.

Halid was reverently carried off to the Mosque, and Osman thought that
it was time to leave the corpse to take care of itself. The Imam laid
Halid on the marble floor and prepared to wash him prior to interment.
He had taken off his turban and long cloak and got ready the water,
when he remembered that he had no soap, and immediately went out to
purchase some. No sooner had the Imam disappeared than Halid jumped
up, and, donning the Imam's turban and long cloak, repaired to the
Sublime Porte. Here he asked admittance to the Grand Vizier, but this
request was not granted until he told the nature of his business.
Halid said he was the Imam who, in compliance with the verbal
instructions received from his Highness, had buried a stranger and
that he had come for payment. The Grand Vizier sent five gold pieces
(twenty piasters each) to the supposed Imam, and Halid made off as
fast as possible.

No sooner had Halid departed than the cloakless Imam arrived in
breathless haste, and explained that he was the Imam who had received
instructions from the Grand Vizier to bury a stranger, but that the
supposed corpse had disappeared, and so had his cloak and turban.
Witnesses proved this man to be the bona-fide Imam of the quarter, and
the Grand Vizier gave orders to his Chief Detective to capture, within
three days, on pain of death, and bring to the Sublime Porte, this
fearless evil-doer.

The Chief Detective was soon on the track of Halid; but the latter was
on the keen lookout. With the aid of the money he had received from
the Grand Vizier to defray his burial expenses he successfully evaded
the clutches of the Chief Detective, who was greatly put about at
being thus frustrated. On the second day he again got scent of Halid
and determined to follow him till an opportunity offered for his
capture. Halid knew that he was followed and divined the intentions of
his pursuer. As he was passing a pharmacy he noticed there several
young men, so he entered and explained in Jewish-Spanish (one of his
accomplishments) to the Jew druggist, as he handed him one of the gold
pieces he had received from the Grand Vizier, that his uncle, who
would come in presently, was not right in his mind; but that if the
druggist could manage to douche his head and back with cold water, he
would be all right for a week or two. No sooner did the Chief
Detective enter the shop than, at a word from the apothecary, the
young men seized him and, by means of a large squirt, they did their
utmost to effectively give him the salutary and cooling douche. The
more the detective protested, the more the apothecary consolingly
explained that the operation would soon be over and that he would feel
much better, and told of the numerous similar cases he had cured in a
like manner. The detective saw that it was useless to struggle, so he
abandoned himself to the treatment; and in the meantime Halid made
off. The Chief Detective was so disheartened that he went to the Grand
Vizier and asked him to behead him, as death was preferable to the
annoyance he had received and might still receive at the hands of
Chapkin Halid. The Grand Vizier was both furious and amused, so he
spared the Chief Detective and gave orders that guards be placed at
the twenty-four gates of the city, and that Halid be seized at the
first opportunity. A reward was further promised to the person who
would bring him to the Sublime Porte.

Halid was finally caught one night as he was going out of the
Top-Kapou (Cannon Gate), and the guards, rejoicing in their capture,
after considerable consultation decided to bind Halid to a large tree
close to the Guard house, and thus both avoid the loss of sleep and
the anxiety incident to watching over so desperate a character. This
was done, and Halid now thought that his case was hopeless. Towards
dawn, Halid perceived a man with a lantern walking toward the Armenian
Church, and rightly concluded that it was the beadle going to make
ready for the early morning service. So he called out in a loud voice:

"Beadle! Brother! Beadle! Brother! come here quickly."

Now it happened that the beadle was a poor hunchback, and no sooner
did Halid perceive this than he said:

"Quick! Quick! Beadle, look at my back and see if it has gone!"

"See if what has gone?" asked the beadle, carefully looking behind the
tree.

"Why, my hump, of course," answered Halid.

The beadle made a close inspection and declared that he could see no
hump.

"A thousand thanks!" fervently exclaimed Halid, "then please undo the
rope."

The beadle set about to liberate Halid, and at the same time earnestly
begged to be told how he had got rid of the hump, so that he also
might free himself of his deformity. Halid agreed to tell him the
cure, provided the beadle had not yet broken fast, and also that he
was prepared to pay a certain small sum of money for the secret. The
beadle satisfied Halid on both of these points, and the latter
immediately set about binding the hunchback to the tree, and further
told him, on pain of breaking the spell, to repeat sixty-one times the
words: 'Esserti! Pesserti! Sersepeti!' if he did this, the hump would
of a certainty disappear. Halid left the poor beadle religiously and
earnestly repeating the words.

The guards were furious when they found, bound to the tree, a madman,
as they thought, repeating incoherent words, instead of Halid. They
began to unbind the captive, but the only answer they could get to
their host of questions was 'Esserti, Pesserti, Sersepeti.' As the
knots were loosened, the louder did the beadle in despair call out the
charmed words in the hopes of arresting them. No sooner was the beadle
freed than he asked God to bring down calamity on the destroyers of
the charm that was to remove his hunch. On hearing the beadle's tale,
the guards understood how their prisoner had secured his liberty, and
sent word to the Chief Detective. This gentleman told the Grand Vizier
of the unheard-of cunning of the escaped prisoner. The Grand Vizier
was amused and also very anxious to see this Chapkin Halid, so he sent
criers all over the city, giving full pardon to Halid on condition
that he would come to the Sublime Porte and confess in person to the
Grand Vizier. Halid obeyed the summons, and came to kiss the hem of
the Grand Vizier's garment, who was so favorably impressed by him that
he then and there appointed him to be his Chief Detective.




HOW COBBLER AHMET BECAME THE CHIEF ASTROLOGER


Every day cobbler Ahmet, year in and year out, measured the breadth of
his tiny cabin with his arms as he stitched old shoes. To do this was
his Kismet, his decreed fate, and he was content--and why not? his
business brought him quite sufficient to provide the necessaries of
life for both himself and his wife. And had it not been for a
coincidence that occurred, in all probability he would have mended old
boots and shoes to the end of his days.

One day cobbler Ahmet's wife went to the Hamam (bath), and while there
she was much annoyed at being obliged to give up her compartment,
owing to the arrival of the Harem and retinue of the Chief Astrologer
to the Sultan. Much hurt, she returned home and vented her pique upon
her innocent husband.

"Why are you not the Chief Astrologer to the Sultan?" she said. "I
will never call or think of you as my husband until you have been
appointed Chief Astrologer to his Majesty."

Ahmet thought that this was another phase in the eccentricity of woman
which in all probability would disappear before morning, so he took
small notice of what his wife said. But Ahmet was wrong. His wife
persisted so much in his giving up his present means of earning a
livelihood and becoming an astrologer, that finally, for the sake of
peace, he complied with her desire. He sold his tools and collection
of sundry old boots and shoes, and, with the proceeds purchased an
inkwell and reeds. But this, alas! did not constitute him an
astrologer, and he explained to his wife that this mad idea of hers
would bring him to an unhappy end. She, however, could not be moved,
and insisted on his going to the highway, there to wisely practise
the art, and thus ultimately become the Chief Astrologer.

In obedience to his wife's instructions, Ahmet sat down on the
highroad, and his oppressed spirit sought comfort in looking at the
heavens and sighing deeply. While in this condition a Hanoum in great
excitement came and asked him if he communicated with the stars. Poor
Ahmet sighed, saying that he was compelled to converse with them.

"Then please tell me where my diamond ring is, and I will both bless
and handsomely reward you."

The Hanoum, with this, immediately squatted on the ground, and began
to tell Ahmet that she had gone to the bath that morning and that she
was positive that she then had the ring, but every corner of the Hamam
had been searched, and the ring was not to be found.

"Oh! astrologer, for the love of Allah, exert your eye to see the
unseen."

"Hanoum Effendi," replied Ahmet, the instant her excited flow of
language had ceased, "I perceive a rent," referring to a tear he had
noticed in her shalvars or baggy trousers. Up jumped the Hanoum,
exclaiming:

"A thousand holy thanks! You are right! Now I remember! I put the ring
in a crevice of the cold water fountain." And in her gratitude she
handed Ahmet several gold pieces.

In the evening he returned to his home, and giving the gold to his
wife, said: "Take this money, wife; may it satisfy you, and in return
all I ask is that you allow me to go back to the trade of my father,
and not expose me to the danger and suffering of trudging the road
shoeless."

But her purpose was unmoved. Until he became the Chief Astrologer she
would neither call him nor think of him as her husband.

In the meantime, owing to the discovery of the ring, the fame of Ahmet
the cobbler spread far and wide. The tongue of the Hanoum never
ceased to sound his praise.

It happened that the wife of a certain Pasha had appropriated a
valuable diamond necklace, and as a last resource, the Pasha
determined, seeing that all the astrologers, Hodjas, and diviners had
failed to discover the article, to consult Ahmet the cobbler, whose
praises were in every mouth.

The Pasha went to Ahmet, and, in fear and trembling, the wife who had
appropriated the necklace sent her confidential slave to overhear what
the astrologer would say. The Pasha told Ahmet all he knew about the
necklace, but this gave no clue, and in despair he asked how many
diamonds the necklace contained. On being told that there were
twenty-four, Ahmet, to put off the evil hour, said it would take an
hour to discover each diamond, consequently would the Pasha come on
the morrow at the same hour when, Inshallah, he would perhaps be able
to give him some news.

The Pasha departed, and no sooner was he out of earshot, than the
troubled Ahmet exclaimed in a loud voice:

"Oh woman! Oh woman! what evil influence impelled you to go the wrong
path, and drag others with you! When the twenty-four hours are up, you
will perhaps repent! Alas! Too late. Your husband gone from you
forever! Without a hope even of being united in paradise."

Ahmet was referring to himself and his wife, for he fully expected to
be cast into prison on the following day as an impostor. But the slave
who had been listening gave another interpretation to his words, and
hurrying off, told her mistress that the astrologer knew all about the
theft. The good man had even bewailed the separation that would
inevitably take place. The Pasha's wife was distracted, and hurried
off to plead her cause in person with the astrologer. On approaching
Ahmet, the first words she said, in her excitement, were:

"Oh learned Hodja, you are a great and good man. Have compassion on
my weakness and do not expose me to the wrath of my husband! I will do
such penance as you may order, and bless you five times daily as long
as I live."

"How can I save you?" innocently asked Ahmet. "What is decreed is
decreed!"

And then, though silent, looked volumes, for he instinctively knew
that words unuttered were arrows still in the quiver.

"If you won't pity me," continued the Hanoum, in despair, "I will go
and confess to my Pasha, and perhaps he will forgive me."

To this appeal Ahmet said he must ask the stars for their views on the
subject. The Hanoum inquired if the answer would come before the
twenty-four hours were up. Ahmet's reply to this was a long and
concentrated gaze at the heavens.

"Oh Hodja Effendi, I must go now, or the Pasha will miss me. Shall I
give you the necklace to restore to the Pasha without explanation,
when he comes to-morrow for the answer?"

Ahmet now realized what all the trouble was about, and in
consideration of a fee, he promised not to reveal her theft on the
condition that she would at once return home and place the necklace
between the mattresses of her Pasha's bed. This the grateful woman
agreed to do, and departed invoking blessings on Ahmet, who in return
promised to exercise his influence in her behalf for astral
intervention.

When the Pasha came to the astrologer at the appointed time, he
explained to him, that if he wanted both the necklace and the thief or
thieves, it would take a long time, as it was impossible to hurry the
stars; but if he would be content with the necklace alone, the
horoscope indicated that the stars would oblige him at once. The Pasha
said that he would be quite satisfied if he could get his diamonds
again, and Ahmet at once told him where to find them. The Pasha
returned to his home not a little sceptical, and immediately searched
for the necklace where Ahmet had told him it was to be found. His joy
and astonishment on discovering the long-lost article knew no bounds,
and the fame of Ahmet the cobbler was the theme of every tongue.

Having received handsome payment from both the Pasha and the Hanoum,
Ahmet earnestly begged of his wife to desist and not bring down sorrow
and calamity upon his head. But his pleadings were in vain. Satan had
closed his wife's ear to reason with envy. Resigned to his fate, all
he could do was to consult the stars, and after mature thought give
their communication, or assert that the stars had, for some reason
best known to the applicant, refused to commune on the subject.

It happened that forty cases of gold were stolen from the Imperial
Treasury, and every astrologer having failed to get even a clue as to
where the money was or how it had disappeared, Ahmet was approached.
Poor man, his case now looked hopeless! Even the Chief Astrologer was
in disgrace. What might be his punishment he did not know--most
probably death. Ahmet had no idea of the numerical importance of
forty; but concluding that it must be large he asked for a delay of
forty days to discover the forty cases of gold. Ahmet gathered up the
implements of his occult art, and before returning to his home, went
to a shop and asked for forty beans--neither one more nor one less.
When he got home and laid them down before him he appreciated the
number of cases of gold that had been stolen, and also the number of
days he had to live. He knew it would be useless to explain to his
wife the seriousness of the case, so that evening he took from his
pocket the forty beans and mournfully said:

"Forty cases of gold,--forty thieves,--forty days; and here is one of
them," handing a bean to his wife. "The rest remain in their place
until the time comes to give them up."

While Ahmet was saying this to his wife one of the thieves was
listening at the window. The thief was sure he had been discovered
when he heard Ahmet say, "And here is one of them," and hurried off to
tell his companions.

The thieves were greatly distressed, but decided to wait till the next
evening and see what would happen then, and another of the number was
sent to listen and see if the report would be verified. The listener
had not long been stationed at his post when he heard Ahmet say to his
wife: "And here is another of them," meaning another of the forty days
of his life. But the thief understood the words otherwise, and hurried
off to tell his chief that the astrologer knew all about it and knew
that he had been there. The thieves consequently decided to send a
delegation to Ahmet, confessing their guilt and offering to return the
forty cases of gold intact. Ahmet received them, and on hearing their
confession, accompanied with their condition to return the gold,
boldly told them that he did not require their aid; that it was in his
power to take possession of the forty cases of gold whenever he
wished, but that he had no special desire to see them all executed,
and he would plead their cause if they would go and put the gold in a
place he indicated. This was agreed to, and Ahmet continued to give
his wife a bean daily--but now with another purpose; he no longer
feared the loss of his head, but discounted by degrees the great
reward he hoped to receive. At last the final bean was given to his
wife, and Ahmet was summoned to the Palace. He went, and explained to
his Majesty that the stars refused both to reveal the thieves and the
gold, but whichever of the two his Majesty wished would be immediately
granted. The Treasury being low, it was decided that, provided the
cases were returned with the gold intact, his Majesty would be
satisfied. Ahmet conducted them to the place where the gold was
buried, and amidst great rejoicing it was taken back to the Palace.
The Sultan was so pleased with Ahmet, that he appointed him to the
office of Chief Astrologer, and his wife attained her desire.

The Sultan was one day walking in his Palace grounds accompanied by
his Chief Astrologer; wishing to test his powers he caught a
grasshopper, and holding his closed hand out to the astrologer asked
him what it contained. Ahmet, in a pained and reproachful tone,
answered the Sultan by a much-quoted proverb: "Alas! Your Majesty! the
grasshopper never knows where its third leap will land it,"
figuratively alluding to himself and the dangerous hazard of guessing
what was in the clenched hand of his Majesty. The Sultan was so struck
by the reply that Ahmet was never again troubled to demonstrate his
powers.




THE WISE SON OF ALI PASHA


A servant of his Majesty Sultan Ahmet, who had been employed for
twenty-five years in the Palace, begged leave of the Sultan to allow
him to retire to his native home, and at the same time solicited a
pension to enable him to live. The Sultan asked him if he had not
saved any money. The man replied that owing to his having to support a
large family, he had been unable to do so. The Sultan was very angry
that any of his servants, especially in the immediate employ of his
household, should, after so many years' service, say that he was
penniless. Disbelieving the statement, and in order to make an
example, the Sultan gave orders that Hassan should quit the Palace in
the identical state he had entered it twenty-five years before.
Hassan was accordingly disrobed of all his splendor, and his various
effects, the accumulation of a quarter of a century, were confiscated,
and distributed amongst the legion of Palace servants. Poor Hassan,
without a piaster in his pocket, and dressed in the rude costume of
his native province, began his weary journey homeward on foot.

In time he reached the suburbs of a town in Asia Minor, and seeing
some boys playing, he approached them, sat on the ground, and watched
their pastime. The boys were playing at state affairs: one was a
Sultan, another his Vizier, who had his cabinet of Ministers, while
close by were a number of boys bound hand and foot, representing
political and other prisoners, awaiting judgment for their imaginary
misdeeds. The Sultan, who was sitting with worthy dignity on a throne
made of branches and stones, decorated with many-colored centrepieces,
beckoned to Hassan to draw near, and asked him where he had come from.
Hassan replied that he had come from Stamboul, from the Palace of the
Sultan.

"That's a lie," said the mock Sultan, "no one ever came from Stamboul
dressed in that fashion, much less from the Palace; you are from the
far interior, and if you do not confess that what I say is true, you
will be tried by my Ministers, and punished accordingly."

Hassan, partly to participate in their boyish amusement, and partly to
unburden his aching heart, related his sad fate to his youthful
audience. When he had finished, the boy Sultan, Ali by name, asked him
if he had received his twenty-five years. Hassan, not fully grasping
what the boy said, replied:

"Nothing! Nothing!"

"That is unjust," continued Ali, "and you shall go back to the Sultan
and ask that your twenty-five years be returned to you so that you may
plough and till your ground, and thus make provision for the period of
want, old age."

Hassan was struck by the sound advice the boy had given him, thanked
him and said he would follow it to the letter. The boys then in
thoughtless mirth separated, to return to their homes, never dreaming
that the seeds of destiny of one of their number had been sown in
play. Hassan, retracing his steps, reappeared in time at the gates of
the Palace and begged admittance, stating that he had forgotten to
communicate something of importance to his Majesty. His request being
granted, he humbly solicited, that, inasmuch as his Majesty had been
dissatisfied with his long service, the twenty-five years he had
devoted to him should be returned, so that he might labor and put by
something to provide for the inevitable day when he could no longer
work. The Sultan answered:

"That is well said and just. As it is not in my power to give you the
twenty-five years, the best equivalent I can grant you is the means of
sustenance for a period of that duration should you live so long. But
tell me, who advised you to make this request?"

Hassan then related his adventure with the boys while on his journey
home, and his Majesty was so pleased with the judgment and advice of
the lad that he sent for him and had him educated. The boy studied
medicine, and distinguishing himself in the profession ultimately rose
to be Hekim Ali Pasha.

He had one son who was known as Doctor Ali Pasha's son. He studied
calligraphy, and became so proficient in this art, now almost lost,
that his imitations of the Imperial IradÃ©s (decrees) were perfect
fac-similes of the originals. One day he took it into his head to
write an IradÃ© appointing himself Grand Vizier, in place of the
reigning one, a protÃ©gÃ© of the Imperial Palace, which IradÃ© he took to
the Sublime Porte and there and then installed himself. By chance the
Sultan happened to drive through Stamboul that day, in disguise, and
noticing considerable excitement and cries of "Padishahim chok yasha"
(long live my Sultan) amongst the people, made inquiries as to the
cause of this unusual occurrence. His Majesty's informers brought him
the word that the people rejoiced in the fall of the old Grand Vizier,
and the appointment of the new one, Doctor Ali Pasha's son. The Sultan
returned to the Palace and immediately sent one of his eunuchs to the
Sublime Porte to see the Grand Vizier and find out the meaning of
these strange proceedings.

The eunuch was announced, and the Grand Vizier ordered him to be
brought into his presence. Directly he appeared in the doorway, he was
greeted with: "What do you want, you black dog?"

Then turning to the numerous attendants about, he said: "Take this
nigger to the slave market, and see what price he will bring."

The eunuch was taken to the slave market, and the highest price bid
for him was fifty piasters. On hearing this, the Grand Vizier turned
to the eunuch and said: "Go and tell your master what you are worth,
and tell him that I think it too much by far."

The eunuch was glad to get off, and communicated to his Majesty the
story of his strange treatment. The Sultan then ordered his Chief
Eunuch, a not unimportant personage in the Ottoman Empire, to call on
the Grand Vizier for an explanation. At the Sublime Porte, however, no
respect was paid to this high dignitary. Ali Pasha received him in
precisely the same manner as he had received his subordinate. The
chief was taken to the slave market, and the highest sum bid for him
was five hundred piasters. The self-appointed Grand Vizier ordered him
to go and tell his master the amount some foolish people were willing
to pay for him.

When the Sultan heard of these strange proceedings he sent an
autograph letter to Ali Pasha, commanding him to come to the Palace.
The Grand Vizier immediately set out for the Palace and was received
in audience, when he explained to his Majesty that the affairs of
State could not be managed by men not worth more than from fifty to
five hundred piasters, and that if radical changes were not made,
certain ruin would be the outcome. The Sultan appreciated this earnest
communication, and ratified the appointment, as Grand Vizier, of Ali
Pasha, the son of the boy who had played at state affairs in a village
of Asia Minor.




THE MERCIFUL KHAN


There lived once near Ispahan a tailor, a hard-working man, who was
very poor. So poor was he that his workshop and house together
consisted of a wooden cottage of but one room.

But poverty is no protection against thieves, and so it happened that
one night a thief entered the hut of the tailor. The tailor had driven
nails in various places in the walls on which to hang the garments
that were brought to him to mend. It chanced that in groping about for
plunder, the thief struck against one of these nails and put out his
eye.

The next morning the thief appeared before the Khan (Judge) and
demanded justice. The Khan accordingly sent for the tailor, stated
the complaint of the thief, and said that in accordance with the law,
'an eye for an eye,' it would be necessary to put out one of the
tailor's eyes. As usual, however, the tailor was allowed to plead in
his own defence, whereupon he thus addressed the court:

"Oh great and mighty Khan, it is true that the law says _an_ eye for
an eye, but it does not say _my_ eye. Now I am a poor man, and a
tailor. If the Khan puts out one of my eyes, I will not be able to
carry on my trade, and so I shall starve. Now it happens that there
lives near me a gunsmith. He uses but one eye with which he squints
along the barrel of his guns. Take his other eye, oh Khan, and let the
law be satisfied."

The Khan was favorably impressed with this idea, and accordingly sent
for the gunsmith. He recited to the gunsmith the complaint of the
thief and the statement of the tailor, whereupon the gunsmith said:

"Oh great and mighty Khan, this tailor knows not whereof he talks. I
need both of my eyes; for while it is true that I squint one eye
along one side of the barrel of the gun, to see if it is straight, I
must use the other eye for the other side. If, therefore, you put out
one of my eyes you will take away from me the means of livelihood. It
happens, however, that there lives not far from me a flute-player. Now
I have noticed that whenever he plays the flute he closes both of his
eyes. Take out one of his eyes, oh Khan, and let the law be
satisfied."

Accordingly, the Khan sent for the flute-player, and after reciting to
him the complaint of the thief, and the words of the gunsmith, he
ordered him to play upon his flute. This the flute-player did, and
though he endeavored to control himself, he did not succeed, but, as
the result of long habit, closed both of his eyes. When the Khan saw
this, he ordered that one of the flute-player's eyes be put out, which
being done, the Khan spoke as follows:

"Oh flute-player, I saw that when playing upon your flute you closed
both of your eyes. It was thus clear to me that neither was necessary
for your livelihood, and I had intended to have them both put out, but
I have decided to put out only one in order that you may tell among
men how merciful are the Khans."




KING KARA-KUSH OF BITHYNIA


A King of Bithynia, named Kara-kush, who was blind of an eye, was
considered in his day a reasonable, just, and feeling man. He
administered justice upon the basis of the law, 'An eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth,' and enlarged or modified it as circumstances
demanded.

It happened that a weaver by accident put out the eye of a man. He was
brought before the King or Cadi, for in those days the Kings acted as
Cadis, who promptly condemned him, in accordance with the law, to the
loss of an eye. The weaver pleaded touchingly, saying:

"Oh Cadi! I have a wife and a large family, and I support them by
throwing the shuttle from the right to the left, and again from the
left to the right; first using the one eye and then the other. If you
remove one of my eyes, I will not be able to weave, and my wife and
children will suffer the pangs of hunger. Why not, in the place of my
eye, remove that of the hunter who uses but one eye in exercising his
profession, and to whom two eyes are superfluous?"

The Cadi was impressed, acknowledged the justice of the weaver's
remarks, and the hunter was immediately sent for. The hunter being
brought, the Cadi was greatly rejoiced to notice that the hunter's
eyes were exactly the same color as his own. He asked the hunter how
he earned his living, and receiving his answer that he was a hunter,
the Cadi asked him how he shot. The hunter in reply demonstrated the
manner by putting up his arms, his head to a side, and closing one
eye. The Cadi said the weaver was right, and immediately sent for the
surgeon to have the eye removed. Further, the Cadi bethought him that
he might profit by this and have the hunter's eye placed in his own
socket. The surgeon set to work and prepared the cavity to receive
the hunter's eye. This done with a practised hand, the surgeon removed
the hunter's eye and was about to place it in the prepared socket,
when it accidentally slipped from his fingers to the ground, and was
snatched up by a cat. The surgeon was terrified and madly ran after
the cat; but alas! the cat had eaten the eye. What was he to do? On
the inspiration of the moment he snatched out the eye of the cat, and
placing it in the Cadi's head, bound it up.

Some time after the surgeon asked the Cadi how he saw.

"Oh," replied the Cadi, "with my old eye I see as usual, but strange
to say, the new eye you placed in my head is continually searching and
watching for rat holes."




THE PRAYER RUG AND THE DISHONEST STEWARD


A poor Hamal (porter) brought to the Pasha of Stamboul his savings,
consisting of a small canvas bag of medjidies (Turkish silver
dollars), to be kept for him, while he was absent on a visit to his
home. The Pasha, being a kind-hearted man, consented, and after
sealing the bag, called his steward, instructing him to keep it till
the owner called for it. The steward gave the man a receipt, to the
effect that he had received a sealed bag containing money.

When the poor man returned, he went to the Pasha and received his bag
of money. On reaching his room he opened the bag, and to his horror
found that it contained, instead of the medjidies he had put in it,
copper piasters, which are about the same size as medjidies. The poor
Hamal was miserable, his hard-earned savings gone.

He at last gathered courage to go and put his case before the Pasha.
He took the bag of piasters, and with trembling voice and faltering
heart he assured the Pasha that though he had received his bag
apparently intact, on opening it he found that it contained copper
piasters and not the medjidies he had put in it. The Pasha took the
bag, examined it closely, and after some time noticed a part that had
apparently been darned by a master-hand. The Pasha told the Hamal to
go away and come back in a week; in the meantime he would see what he
could do for him. The grateful man departed, uttering prayers for the
life and prosperity of his Excellency.

The next morning after the Pasha had said his prayers kneeling on a
most magnificent and expensive rug, he took a knife and cut a long
rent in it. He then left his Konak without saying a word to any one.
In the evening when he returned he found that the rent had been so
well repaired that it was with difficulty that he discovered where it
had been. Calling his steward, he demanded who had repaired his prayer
rug. The steward told the Pasha that he thought the rug had been cut
by accident by some of the servants, so he had sent to the Bazaar for
the darner, Mustapha, and had it mended, the steward, by way of
apology, adding that it was very well done.

"Send for Mustapha immediately," said the Pasha, "and when he comes
bring him to my room."

When Mustapha arrived, the Pasha asked him if he had repaired the rug.
Mustapha at once replied that he had mended it that very morning.

"It is indeed well done," said the Pasha; "much better than the darn
you made in that canvas bag."

Mustapha agreed, saying that it was very difficult to mend the bag as
it was full of copper piasters. On hearing this, the Pasha gave him a
backsheesh (present) and told him to retire. The Pasha then called his
steward, and not only compelled him to pay the Hamal his money, but
discharged him from his service, in which he had been engaged for many
years.




THE GOOSE, THE EYE, THE DAUGHTER, AND THE ARM


A Turk decided to have a feast, so he killed and stuffed a goose and
took it to the baker to be roasted. The Cadi of the village happened
to pass by the oven as the baker was basting the goose, and was
attracted by the pleasant and appetizing odor. Approaching the baker,
the Cadi said it was a fine goose; that the smell of it made him quite
hungry, and suggested that he had better send it to his house. The
baker expostulated, saying: "I cannot; it does not belong to me."

The Cadi assured him that was no difficulty. "You tell Ahmet, the
owner of the goose, that it flew away."

"Impossible!" said the baker. "How can a roasted goose fly away? Ahmet
will only laugh at me, your Worship, and I will be cast into prison."

"Am I not a Judge?" said the Cadi, "fear nothing."

At this the baker consented to send the goose to the Cadi's house.
When Ahmet came for his goose the baker said: "Friend, thy goose has
flown."

"Flown?" said Ahmet, "what lies! Am I thy grandfather's grandchild
that thou shouldst laugh in my beard?"

Seizing one of the baker's large shovels, he lifted it to strike him,
but, as fate would have it, the handle put out the eye of the baker's
boy, and Ahmet, frightened at what he had done, ran off, closely
followed by the baker and his boy, the latter crying: "My eye!"

In his hurry Ahmet knocked over a child, killing it, and the father of
the child joined in the chase, calling out: "My daughter!"

Ahmet, well-nigh distracted, rushed into a mosque and up a minaret. To
escape his pursuers he leaped from the parapet, and fell upon a
vender who was passing by, breaking his arm. The vender also began
pursuing him, calling out: "My arm!"

Ahmet was finally caught and brought before the Cadi, who no doubt was
feeling contented with the world, having just enjoyed the delicious
goose.

The Cadi heard each of the cases brought against Ahmet, who in turn
told his case truthfully as it had happened.

"A complicated matter," said the Cadi. "All these misfortunes come
from the flight of the goose, and I must refer to the book of the law
to give just judgment."

Taking down a ponderous manuscript volume, the Cadi turned to Ahmet
and asked him what number egg the goose had been hatched from. Ahmet
said he did not know.

"Then," replied the Cadi, "the book writes that such a phenomenon was
possible. If this goose was hatched from the seventh egg, and the
hatcher also from the seventh egg, the book writes that it is possible
for a roasted goose, under those conditions, to fly away."

"With reference to your eye," continued the Cadi, addressing the
baker's lad, "the book provides punishment for the removal of two
eyes, but not of one, so if you will consent to your other eye being
taken out, I will condemn Ahmet to have both of his removed."

The baker's lad, not appreciating the force of this argument, withdrew
his claim.

Then turning to the father of the dead child, the Cadi explained that
the only provision for a case like this in the book of the law, was
that he take Ahmet's child in its place, or if Ahmet had not a child,
to wait till he got one. The bereaved parent not taking any interest
in Ahmet's present or prospective children, also withdrew his case.

These cases settled, there remained but the vender's, who was wroth at
having his arm broken. The Cadi expatiated on the justice of the law
and its far-seeing provisions, that the vender at least could claim
ample compensation for having his arm broken. The book of the law
provided that he should go to the very same minaret, and that Ahmet
must station himself at the very same place where he had stood when
his arm was broken; and that he might jump down and break Ahmet's arm.

"But be it understood," concluded the Cadi, "if you break his leg
instead of his arm, Ahmet will have the right to delegate some one to
jump down on you to break your leg."

The vender not seeing the force of the Cadi's proposal, also withdrew
his claim.

Thus ended the cases of the goose, the eye, the daughter, and the
arm.




THE FORTY WISE MEN


On a day amongst the many days, when the Turk was more earnest than
now, before the Europeans came and gave new ideas to our children,
there lived and labored for the welfare of our people an organized
body of men. At whose suggestion this society was formed I know not.
All that we know of them to-day, through our fathers, is that their
forefathers chose from among them the most wise, sincere, and
experienced forty brethren. These forty were named the Forty Wise Men.
When one of the forty was called away from his labors here, perhaps to
continue them in higher spheres, or to receive his reward, who knows?
the remaining thirty-nine consulted and chose from the community him
whom they thought capable, and worthy of guiding and of being guided,
to add to their number. They lived and held their meetings in a mosque
of which little remains now, the destructive hand of time having left
it but a battered dome, with cheerless walls and great square holes,
where once were iron bars and stained glass. It has gone--so have the
wise men. But its foundations are solid, and they may in time come to
support an edifice dedicated to noble work, and, Inshallah, the seed
of the Forty Wise Men will also bear fruit in the days that are not
yet.

You will say, what good did this body of men do? These men who always
numbered forty were, as I have told you, originally chosen by the
people, and when one of the forty departed from his labors here, the
remaining thirty-nine consulted together and from the most worthy of
the community they chose another member.

What was the good of this body of men? Great, great, my friends. Not
only did they administer justice to the oppressed, and give to the
needy substantial aid; but their very existence had the most
beneficial effect on the community. Why? you ask. Because each vied
with the other to be worthy of being nominated for the vacancy when it
occurred. No station in life was too low to be admitted, no station
was too high for one of the faithful to become one of the 'Forty.'
Here all were equal. As Allah himself doth consider mankind by deeds,
so also mankind was considered by the Forty Wise Men, who presided
over the welfare and smoothed the destiny of the children of Allah.
With their years, their wisdom grew, and they were blessed by Allah.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Scutari, over the way, there lived and labored a
Dervish. His counsel to the rash was ever ready, his sole object,
apparently, in life was to become one of the Forty Wise Men, who
presided over the people and protected them from all ills.

The years went on, and still without a reward he patiently labored, no
doubt contenting himself with the idea that the day would come when
the merit of his actions would be recognized by Allah. That was a
mistake, my friends; true faith expecteth nothing. However, the day
did come, and the Dervish's great desire had every appearance of being
realized. One of the Forty Wise Men having accomplished his mission on
earth, departed this life. The remaining thirty-nine, who still had
duties to fulfil, consulted as to whom they should call to aid them in
their work. A eulogy was pronounced in favor of the Dervish. They not
unjustly considered how he had labored among the poor in Scutari; ever
ready to help the needy, ever ready to counsel the rash, ever ready to
comfort and encourage the despairing. It was decided that he should be
nominated. A deputation consisting of three, two to listen, one to
speak, was named, and with the blessing of their brethren, for
success, they entered a caique and were rowed to Scutari. Arriving at
the Dervish's gate, the spokesman thus addressed the would-be member
of the Forty Wise Men:

"Brother in the flesh, thy actions have been noted, and we come to put
a proposition to thee, which, after consideration, thou wilt either
accept or reject as thou thinkest best for all interested therein. We
would ask thee to become one of us. We are sent hither by, and are the
representatives of, the sages who preside over the people. Brother, we
number in all one hundred and thirty-eight in spirit;--ninety-nine,
having accomplished their task in the flesh, have departed;
thirty-nine, still in the flesh, endeavor their duty to fulfil. And it
is the desire of the one hundred and thirty-eight souls to add to us
thyself, in order to complete our number of laborers in the flesh.
Brother, thy duties, which will be everlasting, thou wilt learn when
with us. Do thou consider, and we will return at the setting of the
sun of the third day, to receive thy answer."

And they turned to depart. But the Dervish stopped them, saying:
"Brothers, I have no need to consider the subject for three days,
seeing that my inmost desire for thirty years, and my sole object in
life has been to become worthy of being one of you. In spirit I have
long been your brother, in the flesh it is easy to comply, seeing that
it has been the spirit's desire."

Then answered the spokesman: "Brother, thou hast spoken well. Allah,
thou art with us in our choice; we praise Thee. Brother, one word! Our
ways are different to all men's ways; thou hast but to have faith, and
all is well."

"Brethren, faith! I have had faith; my faith is now even strengthened.
I do your bidding."

"Brother, first of all thy worldly goods must be disposed of and
rendered into gold. Every earthly possession thou hast must be
represented by a piece of gold. Therefore see to that; we have other
duties to fulfil, but will return ere the sun sets in the west."

The Dervish set about selling all his goods; and when the coloring of
the sky in the west harbingered the closing of the day, he had
disposed of everything and stood waiting with naught but a sack of
gold.

The three wise men returned, and, on seeing the Dervish, said:
"Brother, thou hast done well; we will hence."

A caique was in waiting, and the four entered. Silently the caique
glided over the smooth surface of the Bosphorus; and silently the
occupants sat. When beyond Maidens' Tower, the spokesman, turning to
the Dervish, said: "Brother, with thy inmost blessing give me that
sack, representing everything thou dost possess in this world."

The Dervish handed the sack as he was bidden, and the wise man
solemnly rose, and holding it on high, said: "With the blessing of our
brother Mustapha," and dropped it where the current is strongest.
Then, sitting down, resumed his silence. The deed was done, and
nothing outward told the story; the Caiquedji dipped his oars, and
the waves rippled as soft as before. Nothing but the distant, soothing
cry of the Muezzin, calling the faithful to prayer, now waxing, now
waning, now completely dying away as they moved around the minarets,
broke the stillness.

Ere long the boat was brought to the shore, the four men wended their
way up the steep hill, and the horizon, wrapped in the mantle of
night, hid them from the boatman's sight. A few minutes' walk brought
them to the mosque of the Forty Wise Men; the spokesman turned to the
Dervish, and said: "Brother, faithfully follow," and then passed
through the doorway. They entered a large, vaulted chamber, the
ceiling of which was artistically inlaid with mosaÃ¯ques, and the floor
covered with tiles of the ceramic art of bygone ages. From the centre
hung a large chandelier holding a number of little oil cups, each
shedding its tiny light, as if to show that union was strength. Round
this chandelier were seven brass filagreed, hemispherical-shaped
lanterns, holding several oil burners. These many tiny burners gave a
soothing, contented, though undefined light, which, together with the
silence, added to the impressiveness of the place. Round this hall
were forty boxes of the same shape and size.

Our friend stood in the centre of the hall and under the influence of
the scene, he was afraid to breathe; he did not know whether to be
happy or sad, for having come so far.

As he stood thus thinking, dreaming, one of the curtains was raised,
and there came forth a very old man, his venerable white beard all but
touching his girdle.

Solemnly and slowly he walked over to the opposite side, and following
in his train came thirty-eight more, the last apparently being the
youngest.

Chill after chill went coursing down the spinal cord of the astonished
would-be brother, whilst these men moved about in the unbroken
silence, as if talking to invisible beings; now embracing, now
clasping hands, now bidding farewell.

The Dervish closed his eyes, opened them, Were these things so? Yes,
it was no dream, no hallucination. Yet why heard he no sound?

Each of the brethren now took his place beside a box, but there was
one vacancy; no one stood at the side of the box to the left of the
youngest brother. Making a profound salaam, which all answered, the
old man silently turned, raised the curtain, and passed into the
darkness, each in his order following. As one in a trance, the Dervish
watched one after another disappear. The last now raised the curtain,
but before vanishing, turned (it was the spokesman), and whispered:
"Brother, faith, follow!" and stepped into the darkness.

These words acted upon the Dervish like a spell; he followed.

Up, up, the winding stairway of a minaret they go. At last they
arrive, and to the horror of the Dervish, what does he see? One, two,
three, disappear over the parapet, and his friend the spokesman,
with: "Brother, faith, follow!" also vanished into the inky darkness.

Again at the eleventh hour did the cheering words of the brother
spokesman act upon the Dervish like magic, he raised his foot to the
parapet, and, in faltering decision, jumped up two or three times. But
man's guardian does not lead him over the rugged paths of life; he
gives the impulse and you must go. So it was with the Dervish. He
jumped once, twice, thrice, but each time fell backward instead of
forward. My friends, he hesitated again; at the eleventh hour he was
encouraged, but undecided--he was not equal to the test. So, with a
great weight on his heart, he descended the winding stairs of the
minaret. He had reached his zenith only in desire, and was now on his
decline.

Lamenting, like a weak mortal that he was, for not having followed, he
again entered the hall he had just left, with the intention, no doubt,
of departing.

But the charm of the place was on him again, and as he stood the
curtain moved, and the old man advanced; and as before, the silence
was unbroken. Again did each take his place beside a box, again did
the old man salaam, with the simultaneous response of the others.
Again did they gesture as if talking to invisible beings of some
calamity which had befallen them which they all regretted.

The old man went and opened the box that stood alone. From this he
took, what? the identical bag of gold that had been dropped into the
Bosphorus some hours ago. The spokesman came forward and took it from
the hand of the old man. The Dervish now no longer believed that _he_
was _he_ himself, and that these things were taking place. He
understood not, he knew not.

Coming forward, the spokesman thus addressed the spell-bound Dervish,
his voice giving a strange echo, as if his words were emphasized by a
hundred invisible mouths:

"Friend and brother in the flesh, but weak of the spirit, thou hast
proved thyself unworthy to impart that which thou hast not
thyself,--Faith! Thine actions hitherto, of seeming conviction, have
not been for the eye of the Almighty, the All-seeing, the All-powerful
alone, but for the approbation of mankind. To get this approbation
thou hast soared out of thine element; the atmosphere is too rarified,
thou canst not live, thou must return!

"Get thee back into the world, back to thy brothers; thou canst not be
one of us. One hundred and thirty-nine in the spirit have regretfully
judged thee as lacking in faith, and not having a sheltered apartment
within thyself, thou canst not shelter others. No man can bequeath
that which he hath not. Go thy way, and in secret build thee a wall,
brick by brick, action by action; let none see thy place but the eye
that seeth all, lest a side, when all but completed, fall, and thou
art again exposed to the four winds. Take thy money, thine all, and
when hesitation interrupts, offer a prayer in thy heart, and then
faithfully follow! Farewell!"

And the Dervish was led out into the street, a lone and solitary man;
he had his all in his hand--a bag of gold.




HOW THE PRIEST KNEW THAT IT WOULD SNOW


A Turk travelling in Asia Minor came to a Christian village. He
journeyed on horseback, was accompanied by a black slave, and seeming
a man of consequence, the priest of the village offered him
hospitality for the night. The first thing to be done was to conduct
the traveller to the stable, that he might see his horse attended to
and comfortably stalled for the night. In the stable was a magnificent
Arab horse, belonging to the priest, and the Turk gazed upon it with
covetous eyes, but nevertheless, in order that no ill should befall
the beautiful creature and to counteract the influence of the evil eye
with certainty, he spat at the animal. After they had dined, the
priest took his guest for a walk in the garden, and in the course of
a very pleasant conversation he informed the Turk that on the morrow
there would be snow on the ground.

"Never! Impossible!" said the Turk.

"Well, to-morrow you will see that I am right," said the priest.

"I am willing to stake my horse against yours, that you are wrong,"
answered the Turk, who was delighted at this opportunity which gave
him a chance of securing the horse, without committing the breach in
Oriental etiquette of asking his host if he would sell it. After some
persuasion the priest accepted his wager, and they separated for the
night.

Later on that night, the Turk said to his slave: "Go, Sali, go and see
what the weather says, for truly my life is in want of our good host's
horse."

Sali went out to make an observation, and on returning said to his
master: "Master, the heavens are like unto your face,--without a frown
and many kindly sparkling eyes, and the earth is like unto that of
your black slave."

"'Tis well, Sali, 'tis well. What a beautiful animal that is!"

Later on, before retiring to rest, he sent his slave on another
inspection, and was gratified to receive the same answer. Early in the
morning he awoke, and calling his slave, who had slept at his door, he
sent him forth again to see if any change had taken place.

"Oh master!" reported Sali, in trembling tones, "Nature has reversed
herself, for the heavens are now like the scowling face of your slave,
and the earth is like yours, white, entirely white."

"Chok shai! wonderful thing. Then I have lost not only that beautiful
animal but my own horse as well. Oh pity! Oh pity!"

He gave up his horse, but before parting he begged the priest to tell
him how he knew it would snow.

"My pig told me as we were walking in the garden yesterday. I saw it
put its nose in the heap of manure you see in that corner, and I knew
that to be a sure sign that it would snow on the morrow," replied the
priest.

Deeply mystified, the Turk and his slave proceeded on foot. Reaching a
Turkish village before nightfall, he sought and obtained shelter for
the night from the Imam, the Mohammedan priest of the village. While
partaking of the evening meal he asked the Imam when the feast of the
Bairam would be.

"Truly, I do not know! When the cannons fire, I will know it is
Bairam," said his host.

"What!" said the traveller, becoming angry, "you an Imam,--a learned
Hodja,--and don't know when it will be Bairam, and the pig of the
Greek priest knew when it would snow? Shame! Shame!"

And becoming much angered, he declined the hospitality of the Imam and
went elsewhere.




WHO WAS THE THIRTEENTH SON


In the town of Adrianople there lived an Armenian Patriarch, Munadi
Hagop by name, respected and loved alike by Mussulman and Christian.
He was a man of wide reading and profound judgment. The Ottoman
Governor of the same place, Usref Pasha, happened also to be a man of
considerable acquirements and education. The Armenian and the Turk
associated much together. In fact, they were always either walking out
together or visiting, one at the residence of the other. This went on
for some time, and the twelve wise men who were judges in the city
thought that their Governor was doing wrong in associating so much
with a dog of a Christian; so they resolved to call him to account.

This resolution taken, the entire twelve proceeded to the house of the
Governor and told him that he was setting a bad example to his
subjects. They feared, too, that the salvation of his own soul and of
his posterity was in danger, should this Armenian in any way influence
his mind.

"My friends," answered the Governor, "this man is very learned, and
the only reason why we so often come together is because a great
sympathy exists between us, and much mutual pleasure is derived from
this friendship. I ask his advice, and he gives me a clear
explanation. He is my friend, and I would gladly see him your friend."

"Oh," said the spokesman of the judges, "it is his wise answers that
act as magic upon you? We will give him a question to answer, and if
he solves this to our satisfaction, he will then in reality be a great
man."

"I am sure you will not be disappointed!" said the Pasha. "He has
never failed me, and I have sometimes put questions to him which
appeared unanswerable. He will surely call to-morrow. Shall I send him
to you or bring him myself?"

"We wish to see him alone," said the judges.

"I shall not fail to send him to you to-morrow, after which I am sure
you will often seek his company."

On the following day the Pasha told the Patriarch how matters stood,
and begged him to call on the gentlemen who took so lively an interest
in their friendly association.

The Patriarch, never dreaming of what would happen, called on the
twelve wise men and introduced himself. They were holding the Divan,
and the entrance of the Patriarch gave considerable pleasure to them.
On the table lay a turban and a drawn sword.

The customary salutations having been duly exchanged, the Patriarch
seated himself, and at once told them that his friend the Governor had
asked him to call, and he took much pleasure in making their
acquaintance, adding that he would be happy to do anything in his
power that they might wish.

The spokesman of the Divan rose and said: "Effendi, our friend the
Governor has told us of your great learning, and we have decided to
put a question to you. The reason of our taking this liberty is
because the Governor told us that he had never put a question to you
which had remained unanswered."

And as he spoke he moved toward the table.

"Effendi, our question will consist of only a few words." And laying
his right hand on the turban and his left hand on the sword, he said:
"Is this the right, or is this the right?"

The Patriarch paused aghast at the terrible feature of the
interrogation. He saw destruction staring him in the face.
Nevertheless he said to them with great composure: "Gentlemen, you
have put an exceedingly difficult question to me, the most difficult
that could be put to man. However, it is a question put, and now,
according to your laws, cannot be recalled."

"No," answered the twelve wise men, rubbing their hands, "it cannot be
recalled."

"I will but say that it grieves me much to have to reply to this," the
Patriarch continued, "and I cannot do so without continued prayers for
guidance. Therefore I beg to request a week's time before giving my
answer."

To this no objection was made, and the Patriarch prepared to go.
Respectfully bowing to all present, as if nothing out of the common
had happened, he slowly moved toward the door apparently in deep
thought.

Just as he reached the door he turned back and addressing the judges,
said:

"Gentlemen, one of the reasons I had great pleasure in meeting you
to-day was because I wished to have your advice on a difficult legal
problem which has been presented to me by some members of my
community. Knowing your great wisdom, I thought you might assist me,
and as you are now sitting in lawful council I shall, if agreeable to
you, put the case before you and be greatly pleased to learn your
opinion."

The judges, whose curiosity was aroused, and who were flattered that a
man of such reputation for wisdom should submit a matter to them for
their opinion, signified to him to proceed.

"Gentlemen and wise men," began the Patriarch, "there was once a
father, and this father had thirteen sons, who were esteemed by all
who knew them. As time with sure hand marked its progress on the issue
of this good man, and the children grew into youth, they one by one
went into the world, spreading to the four known quarters of the
globe, and carrying with them the good influence given by their
father. Through them the name of the father spread, causing a great
moral and mental revolution throughout the world. The father in his
native home, however, saw that his days were few, that he had
well-nigh turned the leaves of the book of life, and yearned to see
his sons once more. He accordingly sent messengers all over the
world, saying: 'Come, my sons, and receive your father's blessing; he
is about to depart this life, come and get each one your portion of
the worldly possessions I have, together with my blessing, and again
go forth, doing each your duty to God and man.'

"One by one the sons of the aged father came, and once more were
united in the ancient home of their childhood, with the exception of
one son. The remaining days of the old man were spent with his twelve
sons, and the brothers found that all of them had retained the
teachings of infancy, and the pleasure was great. The reuniting of the
family, though of comparatively short duration, was happier by far
than the years of childhood and youth which they had spent together.
Still the thirteenth son was not found. The messengers returned one
after the other, bearing no tidings of him. The old father saw that he
could wait no longer, that he must dispose of his worldly
possessions, give his blessing to his twelve sons and rejoin his
Father. So he called them to his side and thus spoke to them:

"'My sons, as you have done may it be done unto you. You have cheered
my last steps to the grave, and I bless you.'

"And the father's blessing was bestowed on each.

"'Of all I possess I give to each of you an equal share with my
blessing. You are my offspring and the representatives of your father
on earth. It is my will that you should continue as you have begun.
You are my twelve sons, and I have no other. Your brother who was, is
no longer. We have waited long, that he should take his portion and my
blessing; but he has tarried elsewhere, and now the hand of my Father
is on me, and as you have come to me, so I must go to show Him my
work.'

"So the father ordained that the twelve should be his heirs, and
declared that any one coming after claiming to be his son, was an
impostor. He also confirmed in the existing and competent courts that
these alone were his representatives on earth. This was duly
registered in conformity with the law, and the old father passed away
to rejoin his forefathers.

"The twelve sons again went forth into the world and carried with them
the blessings and teachings of their father, and these teachings and
ideas developed and grew, and the memory of their father was cherished
and blessed.

"Many years after, a person turned up claiming to be the missing son,
and sought to obtain the part due to him. Not only did he wish his
share, but he claimed the whole worldly possessions of his father,
that he was the son blessed by his father, and exhorted all to follow
his teachings. By those who knew the circumstances, he was not
believed; but many were ignorant of the father, and also ignorant of
the registering in the courts of law, and were inclined to believe in
the impostor.

"Now, gentlemen, this is the case that has troubled me much. As you
are sitting in lawful council, it would give me much pleasure if you
could cast light on the case. Your statement will help me, and I will
be ever grateful to you. Had this son, the late returned person, any
right to all the worldly possessions of the father, or, in fact, even
any right to an equal share?"

Thus having spoken he turned to the Hodjas with an inquiring look.
They one and all, unanimously, and in a breath said, that all the
legal formalities having been carried out, the will of the father was
law, and the law he passed should be respected, therefore the
thirteenth son was an impostor. On returning he should have gone to
his brothers, and no doubt he would have been received as a brother,
but he acted otherwise. He should receive nothing.

"I am glad to see that you look at it in that light, and I will now
say that that has always been my opinion, but your statement now adds
strength to the conviction, and had there been any doubt on my part,
your unanimous declaration would have dispelled it. I would further
esteem it a great kindness and a favor if, as a reference and as a
proof of my authority, or rather as a corroboration of many proofs,
you would, as you are sitting in lawful Divan, give your signatures to
the effect that the decision of the learned council was unanimous, and
to this said effect, that the thirteenth son was an impostor, and had
no right to any of the possessions he claimed."

Flattered that their opinion had such weight, the judges also
consented to do this, and the Patriarch set about drawing up the case.
This he read to them, and each put his hand and seal to the document.

The Patriarch thanked them and departed.

A week had passed, and the judges had entirely forgotten the case that
had been put to them, but they had not forgotten the Patriarch, and
eagerly awaited his answer to their question which left no
alternative, and which would cause his head to be separated from his
body by a blow of the executioner. But the Patriarch did not make his
appearance, and as the prescribed time had passed, the judges went to
the Governor to see what steps should be taken.

The Governor was deeply grieved when the judges told him of the
terrible question they had put to the Patriarch, yet remembering
leaving that morning the Patriarch who had been with him, and who
seemed in no wise anxious, he said that he was convinced that either a
satisfactory answer had been given or would be forthcoming. He
questioned the Hodjas as to what had taken place, and they answered
that nothing had been said beyond the question that had been put to
him and his request for a week's time in which to answer.

"Did he say nothing at all," asked the Pasha, "before he left?"

"Nothing," said the spokesman of the judges, "except that he put to us
a case which he had been called on to decide and asked our opinion."

"What was this case?" asked the Pasha. And the judges recited it to
him, told what opinion they had given, and stated that they had, at
the Patriarch's request and for his use, placed their seal to this
opinion.

"Go home, you heads of asses," said the Governor, "and thank Allah
that it is to a noble and a great man who would make no unworthy use
of it that you have delivered a document testifying that Mohammed is
an impostor. In future, venture not to enter into judgment with men
whom it has pleased God to give more wit than to yourselves."




PARADISE SOLD BY THE YARD


The chief Imam of the Vilayet of Broussa owed to a Jew money-lender
the sum of two hundred piasters. The Jew wanted his money and would
give no rest to the Imam. Daily he came to ask for it, but without
success. The Jew was becoming very anxious and determined to make a
great effort. Not being able to take the Imam to court, he decided to
try and shame him into paying the sum due; and to effect this, he
came, sat on his debtor's doorstep and bewailed his sad fate in having
fallen into the hands of a tyrant. The Imam saw that if this
continued, his reputation as a man of justice would be considerably
impaired, so he thought of a plan by which to pay off his creditor.
Calling the Jew into his house, he said:

"Friend, what wilt thou do with the money if I pay thee?"

"Get food, clothe my children, and advance in my business," answered
the Jew.

"My friend," said the Imam, "thy pitiful position awakens my
compassion. Thou art gathering wealth in this world at the cost of thy
soul and peace in the world to come; and I wish I could help thee. I
will tell thee what I will do for thee. I would not do the same thing
for any other Jew in the world, but thou hast awakened my
commiseration. For the debt I owe thee, I will sell thee two hundred
yards of Paradise, and being owner of this incomparable possession in
the world to come, thou canst fearlessly go forth and earn as much as
possible in this world, having already made ample provision for the
next."

What could the Jew do but take what the Imam was willing to give him?
So he accepted the deed for the two hundred yards of Paradise. A happy
thought now struck the Jew. He set off and found the tithe-collector
of the revenues of the mosque, and made friends with him. He then
explained to him, when the intimacy had developed, how he was the
possessor of a deed entitling him to two hundred yards of Paradise,
and offered the collector a handsome commission if he would help him
in disposing of it. When the money had been gathered for the quarter,
the collector came and discounted the Imam's document, returning it to
him as two hundred piasters of the tithes collected, with the
statement that this document had been given to him by a peasant, and
that bearing his holy seal, he dared not refuse it.

The Imam was completely deceived, and thought that the Jew had sold
the deed at a discount to some of his subjects who were in arrears,
and of course had to receive it as being as good as gold. Nevertheless
the Jew was not forgotten, and the Imam determined to have him taken
into court and sentenced if possible. His charge against the Jew was
that he, the chief priest of the province, had taken pity on this
Jew, thinking what a terrible thing it was to know no future, and as
the man hitherto had an irreproachable character, in consideration of
a small debt he had against the church, which it was desirable to
balance, he thought he would give this Jew two hundred yards of
Paradise, which he did.

"Now, gentlemen, this ungrateful dog sold this valuable document, and
it was brought back to me as payment of taxes in arrears due to the
church. Therefore, I say that this Jew has committed a great sin and
ought to be punished accordingly."

The Cadis now turned to hear the Jew, who, the personification of
meekness, stood as if awaiting his death sentence. With the most
innocent look possible, the Jew replied, when the Cadis asked him what
he had to say for himself:

"Effendim, it is needless to say how I appreciate the kindness of our
Imam, but the reason that I disposed of that valuable document was
this: When I went to Paradise I found a seat, and measured out my two
hundred yards, and took possession of the further inside end of the
bench. I had not been there long when a Turk came and sat beside me. I
showed him my document and protested against his taking part of my
seat; but, gentlemen, I assure you it was altogether useless; the
Turks came and came, one after the other, till, to make a long story
short, I fell off at the other end of the seat, and here I am. The
Turks in Paradise will take no heed of your document, and either will
not recognize the authority of the Imam, or will not let the Jews
enter therein.

"Effendim, what could I do but come back and sell the document to men
who could enter Paradise, and this I did."

The Cadis, after consulting, gave judgment as follows:

"We note that you could not have done anything else but sell the two
hundred yards of Paradise, and the fact that you cannot enter there is
ample punishment for the wrong committed; but there is still a
grievous charge against you, which, if you can clear to our
satisfaction, you will at once be dismissed. How much did the document
cost you and what did you sell it for?"

"Effendim, it cost me two hundred piasters, and I sold it for two
hundred piasters."

This statement having been proved by producing the deed in question,
and the tithe-collector who had given it to the Imam for two hundred
piasters, the Jew was acquitted.




JEW TURNED TURK


Sirkedji, the landing-place on the Stamboul side of the Golden Horn,
is always a scene of bustle and noise. The Caiquedjis, striving for
custom, cry at the top of their voices: "I am bound for Haskeuy; I can
take another man; my fare is a piaster!"

Others call in lusty tones, that they are bound for Karakeuy. Further
out in the stream are other caiques, bound for more distant places,
some with a passenger or two, others without. In one of these sat a
Jew patiently waiting, while the Caiquedji, standing erect, backed in
and out, every now and then calling at the top of his voice:
'Iuskidar,' meaning that he was bound for Scutari, on the Asiatic
shore.

At last a Mussulman signed to him to approach, and inquired his fare.
After some bargaining, the Turk entered the caique, and the boatman
still held on to the pier in the hope of securing a third passenger,
which, after a very short time, he did. The third passenger happened
to be a Jew, who had forsaken his faith for that of Islam.

This converted individual saw at a glance that one of his
fellow-passengers was a Moslem and the other a Jew, and wishing to
gain favor in the eyes of the former, he called the other a 'Yahoudi'
(meaning Jew, but usually employed as a term of disdain) and told him
to make room for him. This the Jew meekly did, without a murmur, and
the Caiquedji bent his oars for the Asiatic shore. The converted Jew
and the Turk started a conversation, which they kept up till within a
short distance of Scutari, when the Turk turned and said to the Jew,
who had humbly been sitting on the low seat with bowed head and closed
eyes:

"And what have you to say on the subject, Moses?"

"Alas! Pasha Effendi," answered the Jew, "I have been asleep, and have
not followed your conversation; and if I had, what worth could my
opinion be, I, a poor Jew?"

The converted Jew then said: "At least, you can tell us, to pass the
time, where you have been in your sleep?" and he burst out laughing,
thinking it a capital joke.

"I dreamt I was in Paradise," replied the poor Jew. "Oh! it was
wonderful! There were three great golden gates, and on the inside, at
the side of the keeper of each gate, stood Mohammed at one, Moses at
the other, and Jesus at the third. No one was allowed to pass into
Paradise, unless Mohammed, Moses, or Jesus gave the order that they
should pass. At Mohammed's gate a man knocked, and on being opened,
the keeper asked:

"'What is your name?' to which he replied, 'Ahmet.'

"'And your father's name?' again asked the keeper. 'Abdullah.'

"And the prophet signed with his hand that he might enter.

"I then went to the gate where Jesus stood, and heard the same
questions put to an applicant. He told the keeper that his name was
Aristide, and that his father's name was Vassili, and Jesus permitted
him to enter.

"Hearing a loud knocking at Mohammed's gate again, I hurried to see
who the important comer was. There stood a man of confident mien, who
proudly answered that his name was Hussein Effendi.

"'And your father's name?' asked the keeper. 'Abraham,' replied
Hussein. At this Mohammed said: 'Shut the door; you can't enter here;
mixtures will not do.'"

"Eh! What happened next?" asked the Turk.

"Just then, as the gate was shutting, I heard your voice and I awoke,
Pasha Effendi," answered the Jew; "and so I can't tell you."

And as they approached the Scala (landing), they disembarked at
Scutari and separated without a word.




THE METAMORPHOSIS


Hussein Agha was much troubled in spirit and mind. He had saved a
large sum of money in order that he might make the pilgrimage to
Mecca. What troubled him was, that after having carefully provided for
all the expenses of this long journey there still remained a few
hundred piasters over and above. What was he to do with these? True,
they could be distributed amongst the poor, but then, might not he, on
his return, require the money for even a more meritorious purpose?

After much consideration, he decided that it was not Allah's wish that
he should at once give this money in charity. On the other hand, he
felt convinced that he should not give it to a brother for safe
keeping, as he might be inspired, during Hussein's pilgrimage, to
spend it on some charitable purpose. After a time he thought of a
kindly Jew who was his neighbor, and decided to leave his savings in
the hands of this man, to whom Allah had been good, seeing that his
possessions were great. After mature thought he decided not to put
temptation in the way of his neighbor. He therefore secured a jar, at
the bottom of which he placed a small bag containing his surplus of
wealth, and filled it with olives. This he carried to his neighbor,
and begged him to take care of it for him. Ben MoÃ¯se of course
consented, and Hussein Agha departed on his pilgrimage, contented.

On his return from the Holy Land, Hussein, now a Hadji, repaired to
Ben MoÃ¯se and asked for his jar of olives, and at the same time
presented Ben MoÃ¯se with a rosary of Yemen stones, in recognition of
the service rendered him in the safe keeping of the olives, which, he
said, were exceptionally palatable. Ben MoÃ¯se thanked him, and Hadji
Hussein departed with his jar, well satisfied.

During the absence of Hussein Agha, it happened that Ben MoÃ¯se had
some distinguished visitors, to whom, as is the Eastern custom, he
served raki. Unfortunately, however, he had no mÃ©zÃ© (appetizer) to
offer, as is also the custom in the East. Ben MoÃ¯se bethought him of
the olives and immediately went to the cellar, opened the jar, and
extracted some of them, saying: "Olives are not rare; Hussein will
never know the difference if I replace them."

The olives were found excellent, and Ben MoÃ¯se again and again helped
his friends to them. Great was his surprise when he found that instead
of olives, he brought forth a bag containing a quantity of gold. Ben
MoÃ¯se could not understand this phenomenon, but appropriated the gold
and held his peace.

Arriving home, poor Hussein Agha was distracted to find that his jar
contained nothing but olives. Vainly did he protest to Ben MoÃ¯se.

"My friend," he would reply, "you gave me the jar, saying it contained
olives. I believed you and kept the jar safe for you. Now you say that
in the jar you had put some money together with the olives; perhaps
you did, but is not that the jar you gave me? If, as you say, there
was gold in the jar and it is now gone, all I can say is, the stronger
has overcome the weaker, and that in this case the gold has either
been converted into olives or into oil. What can I do? The jar you
gave me I returned to you."

Hadji Hussein admitted this, and fully appreciated that he had no case
against the Jew, so saying: 'Chok shai!' he returned to his home.

That night Hussein mingled in his prayers a vow to recover his gold at
no matter what cost or trouble.

In his younger days Hadji Hussein had been a pipe-maker, and many were
the chibooks of exceptional beauty that he had made. Go but to the
potters' lane at Tophane, and the works of art displayed by the
majority of them have been fashioned by the hands of Hussein. The art
that had fed him for years was now to be the means of recovering his
money.

Hadji Hussein daily met Ben MoÃ¯se but he never again referred to the
money, and further, Hussein's sons were always in company with Ben
MoÃ¯se's only son, a lad of ten.

Time passed, and Ben MoÃ¯se entirely forgot about the jar, olives, and
gold; not so Hadji Hussein. He had been working. First he had made an
effigy of Ben MoÃ¯se. When he had completed this image to his
satisfaction, he dressed it in the identical manner and costume the
Jew habitually wore. He then purchased a monkey. This monkey was kept
in a cage opposite the effigy of Ben MoÃ¯se. Twice a day regularly the
monkey's food was placed on the shoulders of the Jew, and Hussein
would open the cage, saying: "Babai git" (go to your father). At a
bound the monkey would plant himself on the shoulders of the Jew, and
would not be dislodged until its hunger had been satisfied.

In the meantime Hadji Hussein and Ben MoÃ¯se were greater friends than
ever, and their children were likewise playmates. One day Hussein took
Ben MoÃ¯se's son to his Harem and told him, much to the lad's joy, that
he was to be their guest for a week. Later on Ben MoÃ¯se called on
Hadji Hussein to know the reason of his son's not returning as usual
at sundown.

"Ah, my friend," said Hussein, "a great calamity has befallen you!
Your son, alas! has been converted into a monkey, a furious monkey! So
furious that I was compelled to put him into a cage. Come and see for
yourself."

No sooner did Ben MoÃ¯se enter the room in which the caged monkey was,
than it set up a howl, not having had any food that day. Poor Ben
MoÃ¯se was thunderstruck, and Hadji Hussein begged him to take the
monkey away.

Next day Hussein was summoned to the court, the case of Ben MoÃ¯se was
heard, and the Hadji was ordered to return the child at once. This he
vowed he could not do, and to convince the judges he offered to bring
the monkey caged as it was to the court, and, Inshallah, they would
see for themselves that the child of the Jew had been converted into a
monkey. This was ultimately agreed to, and the monkey was brought.
Hadji Hussein took special care to place the cage opposite Ben MoÃ¯se,
and no sooner did the monkey catch sight of him than it set up a
scream, and the judges said: 'Chok shai!' Hussein Agha then opened the
cage door, saying: "Go to your father," and the monkey with a bound
and a yell embraced Ben MoÃ¯se, putting his head, in search of food,
first on one shoulder of the Jew and then on the other. The judges
were thunderstruck, and declared their incompetency to give judgment
in such a case. Ben MoÃ¯se protested, saying that it was against the
laws of nature for such a metamorphosis to take place, whereupon Hadji
Hussein told the judges of an analogous instance of some gold pieces
turning into olives, and called upon Ben MoÃ¯se to witness the veracity
of his statement. The judges, much perplexed, dismissed the case,
declaring that provision had not been made in the law for it, and
there being no precedent to their knowledge they were incompetent to
give judgment.

Leaving the court, Hadji Hussein informed Ben MoÃ¯se that there would
still be pleasure and happiness in this world for him, provided he
could reconvert the olives into gold. Needless to add that Ben MoÃ¯se
handed the money to Hadji Hussein, and the heir of Ben MoÃ¯se returned
to his home none the worse for his transformation.




THE CALIF OMAR


The Calif Omar, one of the first Califs after the Prophet, is deeply
venerated to this day, and is continually quoted as a lover of truth
and justice. Often in the face of appalling evidence he refrained from
judgment, thus liberating the innocent and punishing the guilty. The
following is given as an example of his perseverance in fathoming a
murder.

At the feast of the Passover, a certain Jew of Bagdad had sacrificed
his sheep and was offering up his prayers, when suddenly a dog came
in, and snatching up the sheep's head ran off with it. The Jew pursued
in hot haste, in his excitement still carrying the bloody knife and
wearing his besmeared apron. The dog, carrying the sheep's head,
rushed into an open doorway, followed closely by the Jew. The Jew in
his hurried pursuit fell over the body of what proved to be a murdered
man. The murder was laid against the Jew, and witnesses swore that
they had seen him coming out of the house covered with blood, and in
his hand a bloody dagger. The Jew was arrested and tried, but with
covered head he swore by his forefathers and children that he was
innocent. Omar would not condemn him as none of the witnesses had seen
the Jew do the deed, and until further evidence had been given to
prove his guilt the case was adjourned. Spies and detectives, unknown
to anybody, were put to track the murderers. After a time they were
discovered, condemned, put to death, and the Jew liberated.




KALAIDJI AVRAM OF BALATA


Balata, situated on the Golden Horn, is mostly inhabited by Jews of
the poorer classes, who make their livelihood as tinsmiths, tinkers,
and hawkers.

Here, in the early days when the Janissaries flourished, there lived a
certain tinsmith called Kalaidji Avram. Having rather an extensive
business, his neighbors, especially those who lived nearest, were
always complaining of the annoying smoke and disagreeable odor of
ammonia which he used in tinning his pots and pans.

Opposite Avram's place the village guard-house was situated, and the
chief, a Janissary, often had disputes with Avram about the smoke.
Avram would invariably reply: "I have my children to feed and I must
work; and without smoke I cannot earn their daily bread."

The Janissary, much annoyed, cultivated a dislike for Avram and a
thirst for revenge.

It happened that a Jew one day came to the Janissary and said to him:
"Do you want to make a fortune? if so, you have the means of doing
this, provided you will agree to halve with me whatever is made."

The Janissary, on being assured that he had but to say a word or two
to a person he would designate and the money would be forthcoming,
accepted the conditions. The Jew then said: "All you have to do is to
go up to a Jewish funeral procession that will pass by here to-morrow
on its way to the necropolis outside the city, and order it to stop.
It is against the religion of the Jews for such a thing to happen, and
the Chacham (rabbi) will offer you first ten, then twenty, and finally
one hundred and ten thousand piasters to allow the funeral to proceed.
The half will be for you to compensate you for your trouble and the
other fifty-five thousand piasters for me."

This, as the Jew had told him, seemed very simple to the Janissary.
The next day, true enough, he beheld a funeral, and immediately went
out and ordered it to stop. The Chacham protested, offering first
small bribes, then larger and larger, till ultimately he promised to
bring to the worthy captain one hundred and ten thousand piasters for
allowing the funeral to proceed.

That evening, as agreed, the Chacham came and handed the money to the
captain of the Janissaries. Then taking another bag containing a
second one hundred and ten thousand piasters, he said: "If you will
tell me who informed you that we would pay so much money rather than
have a funeral stopped, you can have this further sum."

The Janissary immediately bethought him of Avram, the tinsmith, and
accused him as his informant, and the Chacham, satisfied, paid the sum
and departed.

Avram disappeared nobody knew where. The Chacham said that death had
taken him for his own as a punishment for stopping him while on a
journey.

The accomplice of the Janissary came a few days later for his share of
the money. The Janissary handed him the fifty-five thousand piasters,
and at the same time said: "Of these fifty-five thousand piasters,
thirty thousand must be given to the widow and children of Avram, and
I advise you to give it willingly, for Avram has taken your place."




HOW MEHMET ALI PASHA OF EGYPT ADMINISTERED JUSTICE


A Jewish merchant was in the habit of borrowing, and sometimes of
lending money to an Armenian merchant of Cairo. Receipts were never
exchanged, but at the closing of an old account or the opening of a
new one they would simply say to each other, I have debited or
credited you in my books, as the case might be, with so much.

On one occasion the Armenian lent the Jew the sum of twenty-five
thousand piasters, and after the usual verbal acknowledgment the
Armenian made his entry. A reasonable time having elapsed, the
Armenian sent his greetings to the Jew. This, in Eastern etiquette,
meant, 'Kindly pay me what you owe.' The Jew, however, did not take
the hint but returned complimentary greetings to the Armenian. This
was repeated several times. Finally, the Armenian sent a message
requesting the Jew to call upon him. The Jew, however, told the
messenger to inform the Armenian merchant, that if he wished to see
him, he must come to his house. The Armenian called upon the Jew, and
requested payment of the loan. The Jew brought out his books and
showed the Armenian that he was both credited and debited with the sum
of twenty-five thousand piasters. The Armenian protested, but in vain;
the Jew maintained that the debt had been paid.

In the hope of recovering his money, the Armenian had the case brought
before Mehmet Ali Pasha of Egypt, a clever and learned judge. No
witnesses, however, could be cited to prove that the money had either
been borrowed or repaid. The entries were verified, and it was thought
that perhaps the Armenian had forgotten. Before dismissing the case,
however, Mehmet Ali Pasha called in the Public Weigher and ordered
that both the Armenian and Jewish merchants be weighed. This done,
Mehmet Ali Pasha took note of their respective weights. The Jew
weighed fifty okes and the Armenian sixty okes. He then discharged
them, saying that he would send for them later on.

The Armenian waited patiently for a month or two, but no summons came
from the Pasha. Every Friday he endeavored to meet the Pasha so as to
bring the case to his mind, but without avail; for the Pasha,
perceiving him from a distance, would turn away his head or otherwise
purposely avoid catching his eye. At last, after about eight months of
anxious waiting, the Armenian and the Jew were summoned to appear
before the court. Mehmet Ali Pasha, in opening the case, called in the
Public Weigher and had them weighed again. On this occasion it was
found that the Armenian had decreased, now only weighing fifty okes,
for worry makes a man grow thin; but the Jew, on the contrary, had put
on several okes. These facts were gravely considered, and the Pasha
accused the Jew of having received the money and at once ordered the
brass pot to be heated and placed on his head to force confession. The
Jew did not care to submit to this fearful ordeal, so he confessed
that he had not repaid the debt, and had to do so then and there.




HOW THE FARMER LEARNED TO CURE HIS WIFE--A TURKISH Ã†SOP


There once lived a farmer who understood the language of animals. He
had obtained this knowledge on condition that he would never reveal
its possession, and with the further provision that should he prove
false to his oath the penalty would be certain death.

One day he chanced to listen to a conversation his ox and his horse
were having. The ox had just come in from a weary and hard day's work
in the rain.

"Oh," sighed the ox, looking over to the horse, "how fortunate you are
to have been born a horse and not an ox. When the weather is bad you
are kept in the stable, well fed, groomed every morning, and caressed
every evening. Oh that I were a horse!"

"What you say is true," replied the horse, "but you are very stupid to
work so hard."

"You do not know what it is to be goaded with a spear and howled at,
or you would not accuse me of being stupid to work so hard," replied
the ox.

"Then why don't you feign sickness," continued the horse.

On the following day the ox determined to try this deceit, but he was
stung with remorse when he saw the horse led out to take his place at
the plough. In the evening, when the horse was brought to the stable
very tired, the ox sympathized with him, and regretted his being the
cause, but at the same time expressed astonishment at his working so
hard.

"Ah, my friend, I had to work hard; I can't bear the whip; the thought
of the hideous crack! crack! makes me shiver even now," answered the
horse.

"But leaving that aside, my poor horned friend," proceeded the horse,
"I am now most anxious for you. I heard the master say to-night that
if you were not well in the morning, the butcher was to come and
slaughter you."

"You need not worry about me, friend horse," said the ox, "as I much
prefer the yoke to chewing the cud of self-reproach."

At this point the farmer left the animals and entered his home,
smiling at his own wily craft in re-establishing, if not
contentedness, at least resignation to their fate, in the stable.
Meeting his wife, she at once inquired as to the cause of his happy
smile. He put her off, first with one excuse then with another, but to
no avail; the more he protested, the stronger her inquisitiveness
grew. Her unsatisfied curiosity at length made her ill. The endeavors
of the numerous doctors brought to her assistance were as futile as
the incantations of the sages from far and near, and as powerless to
remove the spell as were the amulets, the charms, and the abracadabras
conceived and written by holy men. The evil prompting gnawed her, and
she visibly pined away. The poor farmer was distracted. Rather than
see her die, he at last decided to tell her, and forfeit his own life
to save hers. Deeply dejected, for no man quits this planet without a
pang, he sat at the window gazing, as he thought, for the last time on
the familiar surroundings. Of a sudden he noticed his favorite
chanticleer, followed by his numerous harem, sadly strutting about,
only allowing his favorites to eat the morsels he discovered, and
ruthlessly driving the others away. To one he said: "I am not like our
poor master, to be ruled by one or a score of you. He, poor man, will
die to-day for revealing his secret knowledge to save her life."

"What is the secret knowledge?" asked one of the wives; and the
chanticleer flew at her and thrashed her mercilessly, saying at each
vigorous blow, "That is the secret, and if our master only treated the
mistress as I treat you, he would not need to give up his life
to-day."

And as if maddened at the thought, he beat them all in turn. The
master, seeing and appreciating the effect from the window, went to
his wife and treated her in precisely the same manner. And this
effected what neither doctors, sages, nor holy men could do--it cured
her.




THE LANGUAGE OF BIRDS


There once lived a Hodja who, it was said, understood the language of
birds, but refused to impart his knowledge. One young man was very
persistent in his desire to know the language of these sweet
creatures, but the Hodja was inflexible.

In despair, the young man went to the woods at least to listen to the
pleasant chirping of the birds. By degrees it conveyed to him a
meaning, till, finally, he understood them to tell him that his horse
would die. On returning from the woods, he immediately sold his horse
and went and told the Hodja.

"Oh Hodja, why will you not teach me the language of birds? Yesterday
I went to the woods and they warned me that my horse would die, thus
affording me an opportunity of selling it and avoiding the loss."

The Hodja was silent, but would not give way.

The following day the young man again went to the woods, and the
chirping of the birds told him that his house would be burned. The
young man hurried away, sold his house, again went to the Hodja and
told him all that had happened, adding:

"See, Hodja Effendi, you would not teach me the language of the birds,
but I have saved my horse and my house by listening to them."

On the following day, the young man again went to the woods, and the
birds chirped him the doleful tale, that on the following day he would
die. In tears the young man went to the Hodja for advice.

"Oh Hodja Effendi! Alas! What am I to do? The birds have told me that
to-morrow I must die."

"My son," answered the Hodja, "I knew this would come, and that is
why I refused to teach you the language of birds. Had you borne the
loss of your horse, your house would have been saved, and had your
house been burned, your life would have been saved."




THE SWALLOW'S ADVICE


A man one day saw a swallow and caught it. The bird pleaded hard for
liberty, saying:

"If thou wilt let me go, thy gain will be great, for I will give thee
three counsels that will hereafter be of use to thee."

The man listened to the bird and let it go. Flying to a tree close by
it perched on a branch, and said:

"Hearken and give thine ear to the three advices that will guide thee.
The first is, do not believe things that are incredible; the second
is, do not attempt to stretch out thine hand to a place thou art
unable to reach; and the third advice I give thee is, do not pine
after a thing that is past and gone. Take these my counsels and do not
forget them."

The bird then tempted the man, saying: "Inside of me there is a large
pearl of great value; it is both magnificent and splendid, and as
large as the egg of a kite."

Now, hearing this, the man repented at having let the bird go, the
color of his face went to sadness, and he at once stretched out his
hand to catch the swallow, but the latter said to the foolish man:

"What! Hast thou already forgotten the advice I gave thee, and the lie
which I told thee, hast thou considered as true? I had fallen into thy
hands, yet thou wert unable to retain me, and now thou art sorrowing
for the past for which there is no remedy."

Such are those that worship idols, and give the name of God to their
own handiwork. They have left aside God Almighty, and have forgotten
the Great Bestower of all good gifts.




WE KNOW NOT WHAT THE DAWN MAY BRING FORTH


In the age of the Janissaries the Minister of War, in all haste,
called the chief farrier of the Army and ordered him to have made
immediately two hundred thousand horseshoes. The farrier was aghast,
and explained that to make such a quantity of horseshoes, both time
and smiths would be required. The Minister replied:

"It is the order of his Majesty that these two hundred thousand
horseshoes be ready by to-morrow; if not, your head will pay the
penalty."

The poor farrier replied, that knowing now that he was doomed he would
be unable, through nervousness, to make even a fifth of the number.
The Minister would not listen to reason, and left in anger,
reiterating the order of his Majesty.

The farrier retired to his rooms deeply dejected. His wife,
woman-like, endeavored to encourage and comfort him, saying:

"Cheer up, husband, drink your raki, eat your mÃ©zÃ©, and be cheerful,
for we know not what the dawn may bring forth."

"Ah!" said the farrier, "the dawn will not bring forth two hundred
thousand horseshoes, and my head will pay the penalty."

Late that night there was a tremendous knocking at his door. The poor
farrier thought that it was an inquiry as to how many horseshoes were
already made, and trembling with fear went and opened the door. What
was his surprise, when on opening the door and inquiring the object of
the visit, to be greeted with:

"Haste, farrier, let us have sixteen nails, for the Minister of War
has been suddenly removed to Paradise by the hand of Allah."

The farrier gathered, not sixteen but forty nails of the best he had,
and, handing them to the messenger, said:

"Nail him down well, friend, so that he will not get up again, for had
not this happened, the nails would have been required to keep me in my
coffin."




OLD MEN MADE YOUNG


In Psamatia, an ancient Armenian village situated near the Seven
Towers, there lived a certain smith, whose custom it was, in
contradiction to prescribed rules, to curse the devil and his works
regularly five times a day instead of praying to God. He argued that
it is the devil's fault that man had need to pray. The devil was
angered at being thus persistently cursed, and decided to punish the
smith, or at least prevent his causing further trouble.

Taking the form of a young man he went to the smith and engaged
himself as an apprentice. After a time the devil told the smith that
he had a very poor and mean way of earning a living, and that he would
show him how money was to be made. The smith asked what he, a young
apprentice, could do. Thereupon the devil told him that he was endowed
with a great gift: the power to make old men young again. Though
incredulous, after continued assurance the smith allowed a sign to be
put above his door, stating that aged people could here be restored to
youth. This extraordinary sign attracted a great many, but the devil
asked such high prices that most went away, preferring age to parting
with so much money.

At last one old man agreed to pay the sum demanded by the devil,
whereupon he was promptly cast into the furnace, the master-smith
blowing the bellows for a small remuneration. After a time of vigorous
blowing the devil raked out a young man. The fame of the smith
extended far and wide, and many were the aged that came to regain
their youth. This lucrative business went on for some time, and at
last the smith, thinking to himself that it was not a difficult thing
to throw a man into the furnace and rake him out from the ashes
restored to youth, decided to do away with his apprentice's services,
but kept the sign above the door.

It happened that the captain of the Janissaries, who was a very aged
man, came to him, and after bargaining for a much more modest sum than
his apprentice would have asked, the smith thrust him into the furnace
as the devil, his apprentice, used to do, and worked at the bellows.
He afterwards raked in the fire for the young man but he only raked
out cinders and ashes. Great was his consternation, but what could he
do?

The devil in the meantime went to the head of the Janissaries and the
police, and informed them of what had taken place. The poor smith was
arrested, tried, and condemned to be bowstrung, as it was proved that
the Janissary was last seen to enter his shop.

Just as the smith was about to be executed, the devil again appeared
before him in the form of the discharged apprentice, and asked him if
he wished to be saved; if so, that he could save him, but on one
condition only,--that he ceased from cursing the devil five times a
day and pray as other Mussulmans prayed. He agreed. Thereupon the
apprentice called in a loud voice to those who were about to execute
him: "What will you of this man? He has not killed the Janissary; he
is not dead, for I have just seen him entering his home." This was
found to be true, and the smith was liberated, learning the truth of
the proverb, 'Curse not even the devil.'




THE BRIBE


There once lived in Stamboul a man and wife who were so well mated
that though married for a number of years their life was one of ideal
harmony. This troubled the devil very much. He had destroyed the peace
of home after home; he had successfully created, between husband and
wife, father and son and brothers, the chasm of envy wide and deep, so
wide that the bridge of life could not span the gap. In this one
little home alone did he fail in spite of his greatest endeavor. One
day the devil was talking to an old woman, when the man who had thus
far baffled him passed by. The devil groaned at the thought of his
repeated failures. Turning to the old woman he said:

"I will give you as a reward a pair of yellow slippers if you make
that man quarrel with his wife."

The old woman was delighted, and at once began to scheme and work for
the coveted slippers. At an hour when she was sure to find the lady
alone, she went and solicited alms, weeping and bemoaning her sad fate
at being a lonely old woman whose husband was long since dead. She
appealed to the lady for compassion in proportion as she hoped for the
duration of the cup she and her husband quaffed in undivided
happiness. The lady was very generous to the old woman, each day
giving her something; so much so, that the thought that her good
husband might think her extravagant often gave her some uneasiness.

One day the old woman looked into the shop-door of her benefactress's
husband and planted the first evil seed by calling out:

"Ah! if men only knew where the money they work for from morning till
night goes, or knew what their wives did when they were away, some
homes would not be so happy."

The evil woman then went her way, and the good shopman wondered why
she had said these words to him. A passing thought suggested that it
was strange that of late his wife had asked him several times for a
few extra piasters. The next day, the old woman as usual solicited
alms of her victim. In the fulness of her hypocrisy she embraced the
young lady before departing, taking care to leave the imprint of her
blackened hand on her dupe's back. The old woman then again went to
the shop, looked at her victim's husband, and said:

"Oh! how blind men are! They only look in a woman's face for truth and
loyalty; they forget to look at the back where the stamp of the
lover's hand is to be seen."

As before, the old woman disappeared. But the mind of the shopman was
troubled and his heart was heavy. In this oppressed state he went to
his home, and an opportunity offering he looked at his wife's back,
and was aghast to see there the impression of a hand. He got up and
left his home, a broken-hearted man.

The devil was deeply impressed at the signal success of the old woman,
and hastened to redeem his promise. He took a long pole, tied the pair
of slippers at the end, and hurried off to the old woman. Arriving at
her house he called out to her to open the window. When she did this,
he thrust in the pair of yellow slippers, begging her to take them,
but not to come near him; they were hard-earned slippers, he said; she
had succeeded where he had failed; so that he was afraid of her and
was anxious to keep out of her way.




HOW THE DEVIL LOST HIS WAGER


A peasant, ploughing his field, was panting with fatigue, when the
devil appeared before him and said:

"Oh, poor man! you complain of your lot, and with justice; for your
labor is not that of a man, but is as heavy as that of a beast of
burden. Now I have made a wager that I shall find a contented man; so
give me the handle of your plough and the goad of your oxen, that I
may do the work for you."

The peasant consenting, the devil touched the oxen and in one turn of
the plough all the furrows of the field were opened up and the work
finished.

"Is it well done?" asked the devil.

"Yes," replied the man, "but seed is very dear this year."

In answer to this, the devil shook his long tail in the air, and lo,
little seeds began to fall like hail from the sky.

"I hope," said the devil, "that I have gained my wager."

"Bah," answered the peasant, "what's the good of that? These seeds
might be lost. You do not take into consideration frost, blighting
winds, drought, damp, storms, diseases of plants, and other things.
How can I judge as yet?"

"Behold," said the devil, "in this box are both sun and rain, take it
and use it as you please."

The peasant did so and to very good purpose, for his corn soon ripened
and up to that time he had never seen so good a harvest. But the corn
of his neighbors had also prospered from the rain and sun.

At harvest time the devil came, and saw that the man was looking with
envious eyes at his neighbor's fields where the corn was as good as
his own.

"Have you been able to obtain what you desired?" asked the devil.

"Alas!" answered the man, "all the barns will break down under the
weight of the sheaves. The grain will be sold at a low price. This
fine harvest will make me sit on ashes."

While he was speaking, the devil had taken an ear of corn from the
ground and was crushing it in his hand, and as soon as he blew on the
grains they all turned into pure gold. The peasant took up one and
examined it attentively on all sides, and then in a despairing tone
cried out: "Oh, my God! I must spend money to melt all these and send
them to the mint."

The devil wrung his hands in despair. He had lost his wager. He could
do everything, but he could not make a contented man.




THE EFFECTS OF RAKI


Bekri Mustafe, who lived during the reign of Sultan Selim, was a
celebrated toper, and perhaps at that time the only Moslem drunkard in
Turkey. Consequently, he was often the subject of conversation in
circles both high and low. It happened that his Majesty the Sultan had
occasion to speak to Bekri one day, and he asked him what pleasure he
found in drinking so much raki, and why he disobeyed the laws of the
Prophet. Bekri replied that raki was a boon to man; that it made the
deaf to hear, the blind to see, the lame to walk, and the poor rich,
and that he, Bekri, when drunk, could hear, see, and walk like two
Bekris. The Sultan, to verify the truth of this statement, sent his
servants into the highways to bring four men, the one blind, the
other deaf, the third lame, and the fourth poor. Directly these were
brought, his Majesty ordered raki to be served to them in company with
Bekri. They had not been drinking long when, to the glory of Bekri,
the deaf man said: "I hear the sound of great rumbling."

And the blind man replied: "I can see him; it is an enemy who seeks
our destruction."

The lame man asked where he was, saying, "Show him to me, and I will
quickly despatch him."

And the poor man called out: "Don't be afraid to kill him; I've got
his blood money in my pocket."

Just then a funeral happened to pass by the Palace buildings, and
Bekri got up and ordered the solemn procession to stop. Removing the
lid of the coffin, he whispered a few words into the ear of the dead
man, and then putting his ear to the dead man's mouth, vented an
exclamation of surprise. He then ordered the funeral to proceed, and
returned to the Palace.

The Sultan asked him what he had said to the dead man, and what the
dead man replied.

"I simply asked him where he was going and from what he had died, and
he replied he was going to Paradise, and that he had died from
drinking raki without a mÃ©zÃ©."

Whereupon the Sultan understanding what he wanted, ordered that the
mÃ©zÃ© should be immediately served.




                      ON THE FACE OF THE WATERS.

                         By FLORA ANNIE STEEL,
    _Author of "Miss Stuart's Legacy," "Flower of Forgiveness,"
         "Red Rowans," "Tales from the Punjab," etc., etc._

                          12mo. Cloth. $1.50.

    "We have read Mrs. Steel's book with ever-increasing surprise
    and admiration. It is the most wonderful picture. We know
    that none who lived through the mutiny will lay it down
    without a gasp of admiration, and believe that the same
    emotion will be felt by thousands to whom the scenes depicted
    are but lurid phantasmagoria."--_The Spectator._




                         TALES OF THE PUNJAB

                         TOLD BY THE PEOPLE.

                         By MRS. F. A. STEEL.

    With Illustrations by J. LOCKWOOD KIPLING, C.I.E., and Notes
                           by R. C. TEMPLE.

                       16mo. Cloth, Gilt. $2.00.

    "A book that will be welcomed no less eagerly by the children
    than by students of folklore from a scientific standpoint is
    Mrs. Steel's collection of Indian stories, entitled 'Tales of
    the Punjab.' They were taken down by her from the very lips
    of the natives in some of the most primitive districts in
    India. Yet these tales, handed down solely by word of mouth
    from one generation to another, could hardly be distinguished
    from those in a Teutonic collection like that of the Brothers
    Grimm; and even closer examination serves only to impress
    upon us more strongly than ever before the unity of the great
    Indo-European family of nations."--_Nashville Banner._




               UNIFORM EDITION OF THE STORIES AND POEMS
                          OF RUDYARD KIPLING.

                Seven Volumes. 12mo. Cloth. $1.25 each.


                      PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS.

    "Mr. Kipling knows and appreciates the English in India, and
    is a born story-teller and a man of humor into the
    bargain.... It would be hard to find better reading."--_The
    Saturday Review, London._


                        THE LIGHT THAT FAILED.

    "'The Light that Failed' is an organic whole--a book with a
    backbone--and stands out boldly among the nerveless, flaccid,
    invertebrate things that enjoy an expensive but ephemeral
    existence in the circulating libraries."--_The AthenÃ¦um._


                           LIFE'S HANDICAP.

                      Stories of Mine Own People.

    "No volume of his yet published gives a better illustration
    of his genius, and of the weird charm which has given his
    stories such deserved popularity."--_Boston Daily Traveler._


                             THE NAULAHKA.

                       A Story of East and West.

               By RUDYARD KIPLING and WOLCOTT BALESTIER.

    "What is the most surprising, and at the same time most
    admirable in this book, is the manner in which Mr. Kipling
    seems to grasp the character of the native women; we know of
    nothing in the English language of its kind to compare with
    chapter xx. in its delicacy and genuine sympathy."


               UNDER THE DEODARS, THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW,
                        AND WEE WILLIE WINKIE.

    With additional matter, now published for the first time.


               SOLDIERS THREE, THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS,
                         and BLACK AND WHITE.

    Also together with additional matter.


                   BALLADS AND BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS.

    "Mr. Kipling differs from other ballad-writers of the day in
    that he has that rare possession, imagination, and he has the
    temerity to speak out what is in him with no conventional
    reservations or deference to the hypocrisies of public
    opinion."--_Boston Beacon._



                        THE MACMILLAN COMPANY,
                      66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK.




                         TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Other than the corrections listed below, printer's inconsistencies
in spelling, punctuation, hyphenation and ligature usage have been
retained:
    "to-morrrow" corrected to "to-morrow" (page 158)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Told in the Coffee House, by 
Cyrus Adler and Allan Ramsay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOLD IN THE COFFEE HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 30577-8.txt or 30577-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/7/30577/

Produced by Ritu Aggarwal and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
